Others have fallen from a position as law-abiding citizens, and have lost their self-respect, as well as their position, through habitual intemperance.
Their one passion is drink, and they will do anything to get it.
They cannot get work and could not keep it if they did, because of their unsteadiness; so they live off others by begging or by stealing.
The most troublesome criminal to those whose duty it is to protect the public, and the most dangerous to the property of his fellow-citizens, is the professional; and no more than other professional persons does he go to business the worse of drink, for that would be taking an unnecessary risk.
There are few occupations in which sobriety is not required to ensure and maintain success, and this is true whether the business be an honest or a dishonest one.
Not that the thief need be a teetotaler; in his hours of relaxation he may be found proving the contrary; but he cannot afford to drink during business hours.
In prison he may say that he is there on account of the drink, but the statement, though it may be true, is misleading.
It is a convenient formula, and serves to prevent further enquiry.
He knows that those who question him have their prejudices, and he is aware that it is the fashion to trace all crimes to drink—and no further.[Pg 61] Let him frankly confess his failing for liquor and he will obtain some sympathy which may materialise on his liberation.
It is literally true in many cases, the statement: “If it hadna been the drink I wadna been here.” But it is also true that he has not been honest when sober.
For every time he has been caught there are many thefts he has committed and escaped capture.
Continue the enquiry and it is found that what he means is that if he had not obscured his judgment with drink he would not have attempted the job he undertook; or he would have kept a better look-out before he did take it in hand.
He is not a thief because of the drink, but a thief who is caught because he has been intemperate.
The drink in this case has not proved an ally to crime, but an auxiliary of the police; it has not caused the theft, but has enabled the thief to be caught.
In many cases, however, it assists the professional criminal; for the intoxicated man is an easier prey to him than the sober citizen.
He can be assisted home by willing hands that will go through his pockets with skill on the road.
He can be lured into dens that when sober he would avoid, and there be robbed at leisure and with little risk.
He may even be relieved of his property without any pretence of friendliness, with small chance of his offering effective resistance or causing a hot pursuit.
In all these ways he affords opportunity to the thief, and to the extent that the drink places him in this condition it is a cause of crime.
It appears then: (1) that the great mass of prisoners were under the influence of drink at the time they committed the offence for which they have been convicted; (2) that of these the “crime” of the majority is drunkenness, or some petty offence[Pg 62] resulting therefrom; (3) that nearly all the crimes against the person are committed by, or upon, people who were intoxicated at the time; (4) that many offences against property are partly the result of drink; (5) that the majority of crimes against property are not due to drunkenness on the part of the criminal.
But the amount of crime in Scotland is not in proportion to the amount of drinking in any district.
The consumption of drink is not confined to our cities and towns, and excessive indulgence sometimes takes place on the part of people who live in the country, yet no considerable proportion of our prison population comes from the courts of country districts or of small towns.
The vice may be present without issuing in crime, though the drink itself has the same effect on the drinker whether he be living in the town or in the country.
In the country and in small towns, where the population is stable and where people are not packed together, they have opportunities each of knowing his neighbour, and they take some interest in one another.
Indeed, one often hears complaints of villagers taking too much interest in their neighbours’ affairs.
If a man drink more than he can carry, there is usually someone about who will see him home; or at worst he finds rest until he recovers, without the necessity of interference of an official kind.
In the town, although a man may have friends who would be willing to look after him, he is separated from them, not by green fields, but by rows of tenements and multitudes of passers-by who have no personal interest in or knowledge of him; and if he lie down he obstructs the traffic and has to be taken in charge.
He need not be any more drunk than the man in the country, but he is a greater public nuisance.
[Pg 63]In the country if a man have his evil passions stirred or inflamed by drink and seek to indulge them, friendly hands restrain him from doing the injury he might otherwise do, and the crime which has been conceived may never be executed; but in the city a man may, and sometimes does, brutally assault and even slay another person, while people are living above, below, and on each side of him; and no one troubles to look in and ascertain what is going on.
Men do not know their neighbours and do not care to interfere in the affairs of strangers.
They have learnt to attend to their own business and to leave other things to their paid officials.
The officials likewise attend to their business; and the prison cells are filled with men and women who have taken liquor to excess and have had no friendly hand to assist them or to keep them out of mischief.
In the absence of this restraint and help, crime is just as likely to result from excessive drinking in the country as in the town.
There is another difference in favour of the country toper that is worth noting.
The man who sells him the drink is usually a member of the community in which he lives, and he cannot afford persistently to outrage the sentiments of those among whom his lot is cast.
He will not find it to his comfort to obtain the bad opinion of his neighbours; and if he get the name of filling his customers full he may run the risk of losing his license.
It is not to his interest to disregard the welfare of his patrons even were he so inclined.
Each district has its own standard of what is fair and allowable, and no publican can safely continue to fall below it.
In the large towns the licenses are not usually held by men who live in the district.
The licensee is[Pg 64] represented by barmen who have a most harassing and exacting time; who work long hours for wages that are seldom what could be called high; who are engaged selling drink to men the majority of whom they do not know; and who are expected while keeping within the law to sell as much liquor as possible.
Public opinion in the district can only touch the publican on his financial side; and then only by a campaign directed to ensure regulations that are sometimes as futile as they are vexatious, and that attack indiscriminately the man who is really trying to conduct his business in a reasonable way and him whose only care is to get as much out of it as he can.
But not only is there drinking in the country as well as in the town.
There is no district of the town that has a monopoly of temperance.
There are fewer public-houses in the wealthier than in the poorer districts, but there are more private cellars.
There is no bigger proportion of teetotalers among men who have money than among men with none; and business men are as much given to drinking as artisans or labourers.
There is a difference in their methods of consumption, the one judiciously mixing his potations with solids, the other taking his amount in a shorter period of time and running a bigger risk of getting drunk.
Even when he does get beyond the stage of being quite clear in the head, the wealthier man has the means of getting home quietly, and there may be no scandal and no arrest.
Though there may be as much drinking in the district in which he lives as in some of the congested parts of a city, there is less crime in proportion to the number of inhabitants; so that there are other factors than drink necessary to the commission of crime, even when drink is present.
In Glasgow we are accustomed periodically to learn[Pg 65] from the testimony of English visitors that we are the most drunken city in the kingdom; and tourists write to the newspapers and tell their experiences and impressions of sights seen in our streets, quoting statistics of the arrests for drunkenness.
This alternates with panegyrics of the city as the most progressive in the world—“the model municipality.” We are neither so bad nor so good as we are sometimes said to be.
That the streets of Glasgow—or rather some of them—are at times disgraced by the drunkenness of some who use them, is quite true; but the fact that some travellers at some times see more drunk people in a given area than may be seen in any English city does not justify the inference that the inhabitants of Glasgow are more drunken than those of other cities.
In no English city is there so large a population on so small an area.
If there are more drunk in a given space there are also more sober people; but only the drunks are observed.
In Glasgow, moreover, the ordinary drink is whisky, which rapidly makes a man reel.
It excites more markedly than the beer consumed so generally in England, which makes a man not so much drunk as sodden.
If it were worth the retort, one might point out that even if it be true that in Scotland you may see more people drunk, in England you see fewer people sober.
As for the statistics of arrests they are absolutely useless for purposes of comparison, if only because of the different practices that prevail in different parts of the country in dealing with drunks.
It is also well known that a comparatively small number of persons is responsible for a very large number of arrests.
The facts show (1) that drink puts a man into a condition in which he is more liable to commit an[Pg 66] offence or crime than he is when sober; (2) that while drinking is common in all parts of the country, police offences and crimes occur mainly in closely populated districts; (3) that the amount of crime and police offences in Scotland is not dependent on the amount of drinking alone, but is mainly dependent on indulgence in drink under certain conditions of city life; (4) that the major portion, and the most serious kind, of crimes against property, are not attributable to drink.
The majority of persons in prison there because of their poverty—Poverty and drink—Poverty and petty offences—Poverty and thrift—Poverty and destitution—Case of theft from destitution—Poverty and vagrancy—Unemployment and beggary—Formation of professional offenders—The case of the old—The degradation of the unemployed to unemployability—No ratio between the amount of poverty alone and the amount of crime—A definite ratio between density of population and crime—Slum life—Overcrowding—Cases of destitution and overcrowding—Overcrowding and decency—Poverty and overcrowding in relation to offences against the person—The poor and officials—The absence of opportunity for rational recreation—The migratory character of the population—The multiplication of laws and of penalties—Transgressions due to ignorance and to inability to conform—Contrast between city and country administration—Case of petty offender—Treatment induces further offences—The city the hiding-place of the professional criminal—Crime largely a by-product of city life.
WHILE the majority of prisoners were under the influence of drink at the time they committed the offences for which they are convicted, it is equally true that they are in prison because of their poverty.
They are there because they are unable to pay the fines imposed on them.
Their offences may be attributable to drink, but their imprisonment is due to want of money.
There are many who are most estimable citizens, though poor; poverty alone does not lead them to prison.
On the other hand, there are many people who drink[Pg 68] to excess and do not transgress the law; their drunkenness alone does not lead them to jail; but while a man may be poor and virtuous, his poverty will compel him to live under conditions in which any vices he has may easily develop into crimes or offences.
It is sometimes said that poverty, and especially the poverty of the masses, is the result of drink, but no statement was ever more grotesquely untrue.
That drink aggravates poverty is obvious; but no one can shut his eyes to the fact that all poor people do not drink, and that all teetotalers are not rich.
Drink is often a cause of poverty; but to attribute poverty mainly to drink is wantonly to libel thousands of our poorer fellow-citizens who live far cleaner lives than many of their critics.
On the other hand, it is equally unsafe to attribute drinking mainly to poverty, for many who indulge freely are possessed of considerable means, and the practice is not peculiar to any social condition.
That some are driven to drink as a refuge from the monotony of their lives is undeniable; but if poverty makes some men drunkards it makes others teetotalers.
They see that their chances of “getting on” are less if they take drink than they would be if they kept strictly sober, and they abstain till they have attained their object; though they may make up for their abstinence afterwards.
Of prisoners convicted for committing petty offences—the largest number—many have been driven to offend by the squalor of their surroundings.
Poverty tends to limit a man’s choice in work and in recreation.
He is on the verge of destitution, having nothing in the way of reserve, and he is forced to take work that may and often does result in an income that is much less than the expenditure of energy necessary to obtain it.
If he is a member of a family or has friends in the[Pg 69] district where he is living, he can usually obtain assistance in the time of his distress; and he is himself counted on to render help when required.
That such help is commonly given by the poor to the poor is a commonplace, but its importance in preventing destitution in places where poverty is always present is not sufficiently recognised.
The majority of working-class families live almost from hand to mouth.
The utmost to be expected from them in the way of thrift is provision for pay in time of sickness from a friendly society; and even that is not possible for all the members of a household.
Provision may also be made for aliment from a trade union in time of unemployment; and in some cases for some period there may be something saved and set aside in the bank.
They are accustomed to hear of their improvidence from people who have never known what it is to suffer from ill-health and consequent loss of income, and who would find their place in a lunatic asylum if they tried to live for a year under the circumstances of those whom they criticise and direct.
Their lamentations and advice are sometimes echoed by the man who has risen from the ranks to comparative opulence, and who forgets that if his neighbours had been like him he would never have been where he is.
The only capital they have is their health, and anything may happen to set aside the principal member of the family and throw the others into a struggle that may lame them.
The life of the individual worker is nearly always one of interdependence.
In his early years he is dependent on his parents and his elder brothers and sisters.
When he is able to work his wages go into the common stock, and by the time he can earn enough to support himself he may have to contribute to the support of[Pg 70] his parents.
Thrift in the case of any family cannot be estimated by the money saved, and in many of the model thrifty families it may be found that the cash saving has been made at the expense of starving the bodies and minds of the children.
Time and again, well-doing families have become destitute after a severe and prolonged struggle, or after a short period in which they have suffered blow after blow, as a result of sickness or loss of work; and as there is no public provision made for helping such people until they are quite destitute, and then only the minimum of relief is given them and they are set adrift to recover under conditions that render recovery almost impossible, it is wonderful that so many manage to survive.
Those who sink are not therefore to be condemned on that account as worse citizens than those who survive; the time at which they have been struck by calamity may account for all the difference between them.
We are all liable to sickness and death, but if either comes at one time rather than another it may make a very considerable difference to our families.
When a man who is in a steady situation with a fair wage dies leaving no provision for his wife and family he is condemned.
It is in vain to point out that he used his pay towards their comfort and in such a way as to ensure their fitness; he ought to have been more careful; and the very people who preach faith are the first to blame him because he took no thought of tomorrow, but did the best he could in the day that was his.
The fact is that every man who thinks, among those that are dependent on the wages they earn—usually under a precarious tenure of their situations—sees that his choice lies between securing the best conditions in his power for his family in order that they may be the more fit to do their work in the world,[Pg 71] and doing something less in order to lay by some money for them; between starving them in essentials during his lifetime to secure them from starvation should he die, and giving what he has while he is there to give, in the hope that he may live to see them develop healthily.
From poverty to destitution is in many cases but a short step, and it may be taken by those who have done nothing to deserve it.
Sickness, loss of employment, absence of friends who can assist, may drive a man to extremity; and then it is a hard task indeed for him to keep within the law and live.
His sickness may enable him to qualify for parochial relief, but as soon as he is recovered so far as to be able to go about he may be cast adrift without means of support.
If a man does not live by working he can only support himself by the work of others; being destitute he must beg or steal.
X 14 was a man of thirty-five years of age who was charged with theft.
He was somewhat “soft,” and had managed to support himself during the lifetime of his relations by casual labour.
He was physically in good health and mentally not bad enough to obtain care from any public body.
On the death of those who had looked after him he drifted to the common lodging-houses, but he had not enough devil in him to be attracted by any of the vicious or to indulge in any vices.
He began to find difficulty in obtaining employment.
Under the stress of his condition his mental defect became accentuated, and, though not prominent enough to call for official recognition, it hindered him in his efforts to obtain work.
Asked why he had stolen, he gave a reply that in its reasonableness was striking.
He said, “What was I to do? I tried the parish, but they could do nothing for me, for I’m quite weel.
I tried beggin’, but I didna[Pg 72] get much, an’ I was catched.
You’re no sae often catched when you steal.” He did not want to steal, but it was the easiest thing to do.
In begging he took a risk of apprehension for everybody he approached, and from most he would get nothing in the way of help.
He took the same risk when he lifted something, but at any rate he drew no blanks.
He had some very orthodox views on punishment; for he believed that the proper thing to do with a man who stole—when you caught him—was to send him to prison for so many days, the time to depend on the value of the property stolen; but he thought that the man who had suffered imprisonment for theft, and so paid the penalty, ought to be allowed to enjoy the proceeds of his theft; and he complained that though he had served so many days for the theft of a pair of boots, he had not been given back the boots on his liberation.
I cite his case here, in spite of the fact that he was mentally defective, because he really stated correctly the dilemma into which a person is driven when destitute; and because he appeared to be one who, had it not been for his poverty and destitution, would not have required attention either as a mentally defective or a criminal.
His social condition gave no opportunity for the proper development of his mental powers, but stunted their growth.
As for their quality, it is in no wise different from that of many who, thanks to better chances, are able to get themselves accepted as public leaders on the strength of an absence of showy vices, and the exposition of a logical and narrow view of things; solid men and safe, free from levity and serious-minded.
Poverty is no crime, but it is something very like a police offence if the poor person is destitute.
Everybody needs food, clothing, and shelter, and they cannot[Pg 73] be had without money or its equivalent.
A man may starve and go in rags rather than beg or steal, but he must sleep somewhere.
He cannot pay for a lodging, and to sleep out is to qualify for sleeping in a cell.
If the police were not better than the law in this respect our prisons would always be full.
There are many men out of work who are far from anxious to get it; indeed, and for that matter, most people are quite content to do no more than they need; and in spite of all that has been said of the blessedness of labour, there are few of the most earnest preachers against the idleness of others who would prefer to work longer hours for less pay rather than shorter hours for more.
We must discriminate; the objection to the man who will not work is that he is not content to want.
When he gets like that he is so far from being an unemployed person that he has adopted the occupation of deliberately living off others; that is his profession, and I am not at all sure that it is quite as easy as it is assumed to be by those who have not tried it.
Certainly the amateur beggar makes but a poor show with the professional.
His is, at any rate, a dishonourable and an illegal profession; but while in some cases he has been brought up to it, in many he has drifted into it through destitution.
We ought to have no professional beggars and no professional thieves; but as they are in some way made, it does not help to an understanding of the question to label them “habitual,” condemn them, and neglect to ask, if they “growed,” how it was they began their career.
Many of these full-blown specimens have been offered work at remunerative rates and have scorned it, which shows—that they did so; that is all.
It does not show that if in the beginning they had been taken in hand they would have refused to do their share of labour.
All[Pg 74] experiments of that kind only prove that the sturdy beggar finds it easier and pleasanter to beg than to do the kind of work offered to him; they teach nothing as to the causes which led him to begging; and poverty and destitution are the most common causes.
In our large cities there are numbers of children who are destitute because of their parents being unable to provide for them, or failing to do so.
They are cast on their own resources from a very early age, and have sometimes to assist in the maintenance of others.
When they can, some of them leave the homes which have been far from sweet and take to living in common lodging-houses—in Glasgow we call them “Models,” with a fine sense of humour, for they offer the best of opportunities for the formation of citizens who will not be models.
If the boy grows up as he can, and in the process develops anti-social qualities, it is not he who is most to blame; and when we condemn his conduct, as we must, we might at least admit that his course has largely been shaped by the destitution which it would have paid us better to prevent than to punish, when as its result we have allowed him to develop into a pest.
At the other end of the ladder there are men who are refused work because they are or seem old, and who are driven down through destitution to become petty offenders.
I remember when I was employed in the poorhouse a man was brought to be certified insane.
He had attempted to sever a vessel in his arm in order that he might bleed to death, but his ignorance of anatomy—he was a pre-school-board man—had caused him to make an ugly gash at the wrong place.
He was about fifty years of age and was unable to follow the only trade he knew.
He was an iron-worker and had[Pg 75] done hard work in his day.
He had never been a teetotaler, but he had always attended to his work.
At times he made good wages, but he had suffered from periods of depression.
Sometimes he had been able to save money, but it had always melted.
He could get work when work was to be had, but for some year or two now he was physically unable to take a place.
He was a well-doing and industrious young man; sober, steady, and a good workman.
He had been supported by this son, of whom he spoke in the highest terms.
The son had never grudged him his keep, nor had his wife.
Why then had he attempted to kill himself? His explanation was as clear as it was unexpected.
He said, “Doctor, do I look unhappy?” He did not; indeed he was rather cheerful.
“Well, I never had ony melancholy, if that’s the name for’t.
He slaves as I slaved, and at the end he’ll drap tae.
I’ve enjoyed my life on the whole, but I’m fit for naething but to be a burden on him.
Every bite that goes into my mooth comes oot o’ theirs.
If they’re to be something better than their faither or me, they’ll need mair of the schule; and what wi’ broken time an’ low wages they’ll no get it.
I want them to be kept frae work till they’re educated tae seek something better.
I’ve had my sprees, but he’s a better man than I was—no a better tradesman; I’ll no say that—an’ I want his weans to hae a better chance than he had.
No, I’m no a Socialist; I’m a Tory if I’m onything, but I never bothered wi’ political questions, though I’ve heard a heap o’ blethers on a’ sides.
What? Hell? Noo, doctor,[Pg 76] does ony sensible man believe in that nooadays? God’s no as bad as they make Him oot to be, an’ at onyrate I believe that death ends a’.” There was no shaking him.
All he wanted was some lessons in anatomy—which he did not get.
He insisted that he was as sane as any of us, and asserted that he could not be certified; but he was wrong there.
The law takes most elaborate precautions to prevent people killing themselves, aye even when it has sentenced them to death, but so far it has not made any provision for enabling them to work for their living.
We hear of the unemployable who could not work even if he were willing, but apart from those who labour under mental or physical disabilities—and many of them can and do work—I have not met many of this class.
There are many on distress works who make a very poor show; they are not fit for that kind of work, but that is a different thing altogether from saying that there is nothing they can do that is useful.
Certainly in the ordinary sense it cannot be said of the man who is too old to secure employment that he is unfit for work.
He is shut out by competition, the employer quite naturally preferring what he believes to be the more efficient workman.
Few of the older men who are thus thrown on the scrap-heap take things in such a way that they try the open door of death, but the fact that they are condemned to forsake their occupation does prey on the minds of many and embitter their lives; and the fear of dismissal increases in intensity as their hair turns white.
When the blow falls, if they have no resources what is to become of them? There are all sorts of schemes proposed for dealing on the one hand with the young and keeping them longer at school, and on the other hand with the older men and providing them with[Pg 77] work.
To an outsider it would seem that if the number of men employed is sufficient to produce what is required, and there is a large surplus of unemployed labour, those who are working are working too long.
A stranger might be excused for thinking that if one man is working eight hours and another not working at all it would be better for both that each should work four hours; but if he said so he would only show his simplicity.
The man who is employed would quickly point out that this would reduce his wages.
Yet when a man gets promotion, whether in the public service or in private business, his salary and his responsibilities are increased—the former certainly, the latter in such a way that it becomes less easy to get rid of him—but his hours are usually reduced; for more money would be of little use to him if he did not get time to spend it.
This is merely an observation, not a doctrine; but it is difficult to see how employment is to be found for those who are willing and able to work unless we cease to improve machinery and produce less economically; or increase our production enormously; or divide the work and the proceeds more evenly.
In any case, and while that matter is being settled, we might recognise the dilemma into which those are thrust who cannot find work and are destitute.
They must beg or steal, and if they get into the way of doing either they are liable to become less fitted and less inclined for other occupations.
X 15 was an artisan earning a fair wage and enjoying good health.
He was married to a woman who was a good housewife and manager.
When he was about thirty-eight he was thrown out of work by a strike in an allied trade.
A commercial crisis ensued and there was general distress.
He managed for a time to keep his[Pg 78] head above water, but his resources gradually were eaten away.
His employers wound up their business, and when the local difficulty had passed he found that he had to look out for another place.
While idle he had formed the acquaintance of others in like case.
He had been a steady, stay-at-home man, but in their company he took to amusements which were harmless in themselves and new to him.
He also imbibed a taste for beer, but he did not get drunk.
The company was not bad company, but it was different from any he had been accustomed to, and it was not good for him.
For a time he looked for work, but he did not find it.
Others got settled, but the luck was against him, and he became discouraged and despairing.
By and by he looked about in a half-hearted way, and gave more time to loafing than to seeking rebuffs.
He was not destitute, as his family was able to keep the wolf from the door.
In two years he was only interested in getting drink from anybody who would treat him, and in discussing public affairs with others who had fallen like himself.
He had given up the idea of work and had degenerated from a good citizen to a loafer and, later, to a drunkard.
He was never convicted, but he had to be warned because of his conduct towards his wife; and he died as a result of exposure when drunk—to the relief of his family, who were in danger of being dragged into the mire by him.
In this case his family saved him from destitution, but the loss of his work drove him almost imperceptibly into the ranks of the derelicts, in spite of the counter-influences of home.
In many cases there is no family to do what his did for him, and the process is more certain and easy.
Poverty compels men to live under conditions in which their vices may easily develop into crimes or[Pg 79] offences; and it makes those who have transgressed the law less able to recover from the effects of a conviction and more liable to become habitual offenders; but it cannot be said that the amount of convictions in Scotland is in relation to the poverty of any given district.
In some parts of the highlands and islands, where poverty is pronounced, there is an entire absence of crime.
While no ratio can be traced between the amount of drinking or the degree of poverty and the number of crimes or offences in Scotland, there is a very definite relationship between the density of the population and the incidence of breaches of the law.
Not only is there more crime in the city than in the country, but from the densely populated parts of the city there are more committals than from the less crowded districts.
The sanitary reformer has shown us that our city slums are breeding-places for diseases that do not confine their operation to the people who dwell there, but may easily infect those who live under more wholesome conditions; and substituting vice and crime for disease and death the statement is equally true.
By letting in light and fresh air to the houses where so many dwell we are able to save lives which would otherwise be crippled or destroyed by the insanitary conditions in which they are placed; and just as surely we could break up the aggregations of people whose acquired way of living is fatal to the proper development of an enlightened civic spirit, if we were as eager to prevent as we are to punish wrongdoing.
There they are; born into little boxes of houses which are packed together in rows and built in layers one above the other in the air.
Their home life is passed in similar boxes; and when they die they are put in smaller boxes and placed in layers under the earth.
The health[Pg 80] officer would speedily interfere if we tried to house as many pigs to the acre as human beings; but we eat the pigs and cannot permit them to be raised under conditions that would be likely to result in their contracting disease.
Also there are fewer people making a living by furnishing accommodation for pigs than for men; and it is easier to regulate an occupation when those who are engaged in it are not influential, than when they are; for we have a traditional dislike to interfering with the rights of property.
It is therefore much easier to punish a slum-dweller for breaking our sanitary regulations than a slum landlord for living off rotten dwellings.
It is well known that the worse the building is, the bigger the rent charged in proportion to the accommodation supplied.
If a man owns house property he expects to make a profit when he lets it, from the difference between what he has paid for it and the rent he receives from it.
X 16 is an old woman who is past work and has no resources.
She has been in the poorhouse, but will not stay there, though better housed and better fed and kept cleaner than when outside.
She is too old to settle down to the ordered life of the institution, and when all its advantages are enumerated to her and all available eloquence has been expended on her with a view to persuading her that in her own interest she ought gratefully to accept its shelter, she sullenly and silently shows that her opinion of the place as a desirable residence does not coincide with that of those who are in no danger of being forced to live there.
She rents a small house and takes in lodgers, intending to make her living from the difference between what she pays and what she receives in rent.
Under the Glasgow sanitary regulations certain houses are “ticketed”; that is[Pg 81] to say, their cubic content is measured, and a card is fixed on the door stating the number of cubic feet in the place and the number of persons who may be lodged therein.
One adult is the allowance for every 600 cubic feet; and half that space is allowed for every person under twelve years.
The sanitary inspector is entitled to demand admission at any hour in order to ascertain whether there is overcrowding.
He calls one night and finds that the limit has been exceeded, and she is sent to prison, in default of paying a fine, for overcrowding.
Of course there is a difference between her and her landlord, for she has broken the law.
Precisely; but what kind of law is it that can reach only the poorer transgressor and allows the partner in profits to escape?
X 17 is a woman of forty-two who has never been in prison before, and is under sentence for overcrowding.
On a midnight visit the sanitary officer found six adults in a room ticketed for three and a half—a bad case.
The woman’s story was that her daughter had been married to a young man some twelve months previously.
He lost his situation through bad trade and was unable to get another.
The young people wrestled along for a time; but after exhausting all the channels of aid which were open to them, they were turned out of their house for failing to pay the rent.
She admitted she had kept them in lodgings for some weeks before the “sanitary” came down on her, and I suspect she had been warned, but as she said, “What was I to do?” Asked if she had informed the magistrate of the facts, she said she had not.
“I pleaded guilty, because if ye dae that ye get aff easier.”[Pg 82] She could not even make the best of her case, but if she had been able to employ a lawyer she would not have required to transgress the law; and as for stating her own case, that is what few are able to do—till by experience they learn.
Even when a person of education and means finds himself in conflict with the law, if he is prudent he gets an experienced lawyer to appear for him and present the truth in the way that will appeal most strongly to the judge.
Overcrowding not only breeds disease, but it tends to destroy the sense of decency, and affords opportunities for the commission of crime which ought not to exist.
Now and again cases come before the courts that have to be heard with closed doors, and in every one of them this factor of overcrowding is present, affording the opportunity and inducing to the commission of the crime.
The subject is so foul that it cannot be adequately treated here without grave occasion of offence.
Unspeakable corruption is easy and possible, and it goes on because it is unspeakable.
It has often been said that poverty and destitution are not likely to lead to the commission of crimes against the person, but rather to crimes against property and a priori there is something to be said for the statement; but whatever the likelihood we need not concern ourselves with it when the facts are before us for examination.
In the first place, the great majority of persons in prison for committing assaults of all descriptions are poor persons.
It is a rare thing for one in a good position to be convicted of assault, and even the most cursory examination of those who are in prison for assaulting others will show that their social condition was a factor in the causation of the crime.
I have pointed out the part that drink plays in the matter, and incidentally shown that it is mainly[Pg 83] operative under the conditions which exist in closely populated districts; but many of the minor assaults are committed by persons who are not under the influence of drink.
Next to drink, among the women, the most common cause assigned by them for their imprisonment is “bad neebors.” They do not lose their tempers and fight with each other because they are poor or destitute, but poverty makes strange bedfellows and forces people to rub against one another in such a way as to give occasion for trouble; and to leave the fact out of account is simply to attempt to study man apart from his surroundings and to ignore the effect they have on his conduct.
In some parts of Glasgow—much as it has been improved during the last generation—there is literally no room for the people to live.
A place to sleep in, to afford shelter from the weather, to take food in? Yes.
The forbearance, the good-humour, the willingness shown to stand aside and allow another member of the family to monopolise the scanty accommodation, are wonderful; and they are the rule.
Now and then, here and there, a breakdown occurs; and if it result in a breach of the peace, we are not concerned to recognise the cause, but only to punish the wrongdoers.
“What’s done we partly may compute, but know not what’s resisted,” and are not disposed to find out.
A stair-head quarrel is a stock subject for the humorist; but try to live for a week in such close and constant contact with anyone, earning your living the while with exhausting labour, and your wonder will be that the peace is so well kept.
The fact is that those people put up with a great deal more than their censors would stand, and that is one reason why they are so badly off.
If they were as impatient of our[Pg 84] smug mismanagement as we are of their transgressions we should have learned how to regulate our cities long ago.
There is a great effort made to evangelise the poorer classes, and it is well supported by earnest men who are better off; it would not be a bad thing if the slums returned the compliment and started a mission to the West End.
The a priori reasoner would then perhaps learn that while he might expect that crimes against property would in part be the result of poverty and destitution, because such crimes would relieve the poverty, though in an illegal way; crimes against the person are also frequently a result of poverty, not that they are committed with a view to its relief, but because discomfort, irritability, impatience of restraint, and other mental conditions which lead to assaults, are as much an outcome of poverty as it exists in the slums of our great cities as are hunger and want.
There is no slum district in Glasgow that does not contain a larger number of well-disposed than of evil-disposed persons; but a tenement may get a bad name through the misconduct of one or two of its inhabitants, and a street may be regarded as wild although there is only a minority of rowdy people living in it.
We take no account of those who do not annoy us, and when the noisy people anywhere assert themselves we forget all about the others.
When we interfere officially it is to find that, good and bad, they stand by one another.
In this respect they are like gentlemen; they do not give one another away to outsiders; and it is an interesting sidelight on their view of the law that they do not look on its representatives as their friends.
So often its interference results in making their condition worse that they distrust it; and it is often a greater terror to those who do well than to[Pg 85] the evil-doer.
It is no uncommon thing to see a woman who has been assaulted by her husband plead with the court to let him go, and make all sorts of excuses or tell the most incredible story to account for her injuries.
Then we hear exclamations and reflections on the power of human love and the forgiving spirit of even a degraded woman.
Human love is wonderful, but it is no more marvellous than human stupidity; and in these cases the woman is moved not so much by love of the man as by knowledge of the results to her and hers of our way of dealing with him.
On the whole, she prefers to run the risk of ill-usage from him when he is at liberty, being assured of his protection against the ill-usage of others, to having to wrestle on in his absence and suffer from the disapproval of others who are as badly off, because of her disloyalty.
See that her condition is really improved by his conviction and she will be less likely to perjure herself in the attempt to save him from the penalty of his brutality.
In every slum district there are some living who could afford to go elsewhere, but who remain where they are because it has never occurred to them that they should remove.
They have gone to the district in its better days, and the change in its character has been so gradual that they have not taken much notice of it.
They stay on just as men stay on at business after the need has passed, because they cannot think of doing anything else and are loth to seek fresh fields.
It is not good for them that they should do so, but it is not bad for the slum; for old inhabitants of this kind exercise a good influence on many of the others.
Most slum-dwellers are not there because they prefer slum life, but because they are unable to pay for better accommodation.
The smallness of their dwellings[Pg 86] makes healthy home-life difficult and in some cases impossible.
Having no room in the house for the recreation required after work, the man goes out to seek change.
The opportunities offered to him are few, except those provided by private enterprise.
There are the parks, and great advantage is taken of them; but in Glasgow they are nearly all at considerable distances from the most crowded districts.
The public bowling-greens are used to the utmost in the evenings, but are only available for a part of the year.
The libraries attract comparatively few of those whose labour has entailed much physical strain on them; and picture-galleries and museums appeal to only a very limited number of our fellow-citizens, working-class or otherwise.
It was once the idea of those who pleaded for the public provision of means of recreation that these should be of such a character as would “improve” the working classes.
The intention was excellent, but the people themselves were left out of consideration, as is usual when efforts are made to recreate men instead of providing opportunity for them to amuse themselves.
Perhaps they do not believe that it would be an improvement to conform to our ideals; at any rate, the great majority have not shown any eagerness to take advantage of the means for studying science and art which we have placed within their reach; and they remain as regardless of the worship of these deities as the great mass of the richer people who quite honestly have sought to elevate them.
The private caterer has found a way to interest them, for if he failed to do so he would lose his means of livelihood, and that fact may have helped to sharpen his powers of perception.
He has to amuse men as they are, not as he thinks they ought to be; and our regulations[Pg 87] quite properly debar him from doing so in an objectionable way.
The entertainments provided may not be of a very high order, but the purpose of recreating thousands is served.
If we regret that they do not seek something better, let us remember the monotony of their lives, the numbing effect of the conditions to which they are subject, and be thankful they do not seek worse.
The small house of one or two rooms in a tenement is what the majority have for a home, and when there is a family it is insufficient to enable them to evolve a complete and healthy home-life in it.
Social intercourse is of necessity restricted, for there is no room for the gathering of friends; and though public entertainments, while valuable adjuncts, are poor substitutes for social intercourse, they are better than nothing.
The public-house is almost the only place where the mass of town-dwellers can meet in a social way with their friends, and the perils attendant on such meetings are evident to all men.
The effort to provide some substitute for it has taxed the ingenuity and baffled the attempts of many temperance advocates and social reformers.
Much as they have been criticised, the music-halls and such places have been a powerful counter-attraction, but any means of public entertainment cannot in the end supply the need for social intercourse between kindred spirits.
Some day the fact will have to be faced that the only real substitute for the public-house is the private house; and when that is fully realised the slums will go.
Many have to migrate from one district to another because of the nature of their work.
They have not “steady jobs,” and though they may not suffer from unemployment, they may be engaged now in one part of the city and now in another.
The result is that they[Pg 88] have no abiding dwelling-place, and as a rule have only the barest acquaintance with their neighbours; for when people are moving about in this way they have neither the same opportunity nor the same desire to form friendships with those around them.
Improvement in the means of locomotion has contributed to send employers and well-to-do people out of the crowded areas of the city and away from the parts wherein their employees reside.
They see less of their workmen than did a former generation, and their wives and families know nothing about the men whose co-operation is required to secure their comfort.
There is less of personal contact than there was and more chance of mutual misunderstanding.
The bond between employer and employed becomes more and more a mere money bond; each seeks to get as much as he can out of the other; and with it all there arises a general feeling of instability and insecurity, the necessary result of the absence of a spirit of fellowship such as can only spring from the existence of a personal as distinct from a pecuniary interest between man and man.
Where people are crowded together regulations are required for their health and comfort, and the liberty of each has to be restricted in the interest of the community.
The more closely they are packed the more interference is required.
Practices which in the country might be harmless or even laudable would be intolerable if permitted in the town.
To make our rules operative we enact penalties against offenders—and sometimes enforce them.
There are so many now that it is questionable if there is anybody in Glasgow who has not at one time or another been a transgressor.
The man from whose chimney black smoke has issued, or who has obstructed the footpath by leaving goods[Pg 89] outside his shop-door, does not worry over, because he is not seriously worried by, such laws.
He may swear a little when summoned, and say evil things about the officiousness of the authorities, but it is a small matter to him even though he is fined.
The man who finds himself in court for using strange oaths in public or for spitting in or upon a tramcar has more worry over the business.
Even a small fine makes a serious inroad in his day’s earnings, and the loss of time attending the court docks him of the pay by which he might discharge the fine.
However much it may be required, every extension of the police regulations for the government of a city implies an increase in the number of offences and offenders dealt with; and while it is necessary that transgressors should be made to cease to do the things the law condemns, it does not follow that the wisest means are always taken to secure this object.
A crusade against consumption will meet with hearty approval everywhere; but if the crusaders allow their zeal to direct their energies wrongly their good intentions cannot be held as an excuse for the harm they do.
In a city that is ordinarily covered with a haze, and sometimes with a cloud, of smoke; where the inhabitants for the most part live in tenement houses that by no stretch of fancy could be called spacious; where the workers are in many cases subjected to severe physical strain by the nature of their work; and where the weather is variable and trying; it is not surprising that many should suffer from “colds.” They are under the necessity of spitting, and they spit not out of joy of spitting, but because they have to.
The practice is filthy—it is all the evil things that can be said of it; and it should be discouraged.
The best way would be to[Pg 90] alter the conditions that occasion it; the worst way is to make the spitter a comrade of the criminal before the bar of a police court.
As with this so with many other offences; they are manufactured without due regard to the injury that may be caused by their enforcement.
It is an easy thing to place burdens on the backs of others, but in fairness to them it should first be ascertained whether they can bear them.
Many of our laws are transgressed because of ignorance or helplessness; and neither is an excuse.
We are all supposed to know the law, and surely no greater irony could there be than such a hypothesis.
If everybody knew the laws there would be no need for lawyers; and if the lawyers were agreed as to what is the law at any time there would be little need for judges.
So well is it recognised that even the judges differ, that one set is employed to correct another; and a final decision is only arrived at because there is not another set yet provided to differ from them.
If a layman does not know the law he may be punished for his ignorance; but if a judge does not know it the person in whose favour he has given a decision may be punished by payment of the costs of appeal.
Let us not be too hard then on the ignorance of the man who has transgressed one of our numerous commandments.
In the country, and where people are not crowded together, there are offenders against good government; but there each one knows the other, and when a man commits a petty offence, though the local constable sees it, he may be judiciously blind if in his judgment that is the best course to take.
He knows the inhabitants—they are his friends—and he reacts to the opinion of the district.
If he makes an arrest the matter is discussed, and when the offender comes before the[Pg 91] court, magistrate and prisoner meet as persons who know one another.
Judgment is given on a knowledge not only of the offence, but of the offender, and all parties in the case are tried by the public.
In the city it is not possible for the policeman to know the people who live in his district, nor for them to know him.
This is a great disadvantage to begin with, for he is not able to distinguish between those who may be corrected and restrained by their friends without the need for their being charged and those who cannot be so dealt with.
He arrests a person whom he does not know for committing an offence.
The prisoner is brought before a judge who knows neither of them, save officially, and judgment is given according to scale.
As for informed public opinion directed on the proceedings, there is none.
In the city as in the country, however, if an offender is known as being ordinarily a well-behaved man he may not be prosecuted.
If he is overcome by drink someone may see him home or send him there.
It is not so much a question of his being well-to-do; it is a question of his being known.
If not known, no matter what his means he cannot be sent home in a cab; but he may be taken to the police station in a wheelbarrow.
What else can the police do? We take men of good physique and character, many of them country-bred and unacquainted with the complexities of city life.
They are paid the wages of a labourer, and with a uniform invested with powers and duties of the most varied kind.
They must be able to keep people from offending, or to arrest them if they do offend; they must know the law; they must be prepared to act as doctors on emergency—what must they not be able to do? We multiply our complaints, and cast on their shoulders duties we ought to perform ourselves;[Pg 92] blaming them not only for any blunders they may commit, but also for our own.
We compel them to make arrests and then lament the result.
X 18 is sent to prison in default of paying a fine, on conviction for using obscene language.
She is seventeen years of age, but does not look more than fifteen.
In years she is a young woman, but in body and in character she is a big girl.
She is the eldest of a family, the father of which is a casual labourer.
Both take drink, but neither has ever been convicted or charged.
The girl is employed in a factory and earns about enough to support herself.
At night she wants some fun after her day’s work, and she does not want to assist all the time in the household.
She plays with other and younger girls and is probably their leader.
There is no playground for them but the street corner, except they take the “back close,” which is not lit and which might be a source of greater evil than the street.
A complaint is made to the police of the bad language used by the girls.
It is certainly lurid; but where have they learned it? The decorative expressions complained of are part of the current vocabulary of many in the district, but are used with more restraint by the elders.
We have all our pet adjectives, which differ in different localities and are of the nature of slang.
In the West End a thing may be “awfully nice,” though nothing can be at once awful and nice; in the East End the adjective may be quite as inappropriate, but everybody knows its signification; and so with other parts of speech.
True, their language is filthy, but it does not shock those who use it; and that is perhaps the saddest thing about it.
The girls are warned, but they persist in speaking their own language, and in bravado ornament it profusely and shout opprobrious words[Pg 93] at the policeman.
She has not necessarily been worse than the others in her behaviour, but she has either run in the wrong direction or not fast enough to escape.
On her liberation from prison she had lost her work.
She was shunned by the other girls, whose mothers forbade them to associate with one who had been in prison, lest they should be taken in charge also.
It is an offence to associate with some classes of offenders and criminals, and the cautious among the dwellers in these districts do not care to take risks, so they try to keep clear of anyone who has been in the hands of the police.
The law may be right enough, but you will not get them to believe that the innocent person is safe; not if he is poor.
She’s been in the nick; an’ if they see you wi’ her they’ll maybe think you’re as bad, and land ye there tae.” They would help her if they could, but they fear that association with her would only hurt themselves and do her no good.
Those who have been in prison themselves will go with her, and those who are reckless; to their company she is confined, for she will not take to religion and the help of its professors.
She is soon back again; as cheerful and as tractable as any girl could be.
The police could have done nothing else in the circumstances, and she had no grudge against them, but admitted that they had treated her fairly; can as much be said for those who by persistent nagging force the hands of their officials, and who are more bent on punishing offenders than on mending their bad manners? We have lost the personal interest we ought to have in our[Pg 94] neighbours; we have gone out from among them; we have cast on officials duties we ought to undertake ourselves as citizens, and the result is an increase in the number of offences.
In themselves these offences are small matters, but the offenders in many cases find themselves in prison for the first time as a result; and it is the first time that counts.
Every time a man is sent to prison for a small offence committed he has been given a push towards the life of a habitual offender; and the poorer and more destitute he is the greater difficulty will he have in overcoming the effect of that conviction.
His first appearance may be on account of a small transgression, but there is a common saying that is often taken to heart—“As well be hung for a sheep as a lamb.”
The absence of personal interest in their neighbours on the part of men in crowded districts not only permits atrocious assaults and homicides to take place in the very heart of a densely populated district, but it allows thieves to exercise their profession unmolested because unknown.
It also enables them to escape observation when they are being sought for.
It might be mitigated if we were more public-spirited; but it will always be an evil crying out against us, so long as we permit conditions to exist which shut men into dens under circumstances that make decent communion and fellowship between them difficult if not impossible, and compel them to remain there till they can pay a ransom to the man who holds up the land for his profit or his pleasure.
The stranger most likely to offend—The reaction to new surroundings—The difficulty of recovery—The attraction of the city—The Churches and the immigrant—Benevolent associations—The alien immigrants—Their tendency to hold themselves apart—Deportation—A language test required—The alien criminal—His dangerous character—The need for powers to deal with him.
A MAJORITY of the prisoners dealt with in Glasgow police courts are not Glasgow-born; and this holds true of outlying towns.
The town-bred man more readily accommodates himself to the conditions of life there.
He grows up among them and his life is rooted in them.
While he is yet young his steps are directed for him, and he learns to avoid dangers into which the stranger may fall.
There can be no association of a man with his neighbour anywhere without some degree of conformity to a common standard of conduct.
No one can outrage the social customs of his companions with impunity; and everybody is more or less influenced by the opinion of those for whom he has a regard; so he conforms to the standard of behaviour set by the circle in which he moves and is steadied thereby.
If, as is generally the case, his companions are not ill-disposed, he is likely to be a law-abiding citizen; if otherwise, he will get an impetus towards[Pg 96] crime.
In any case he is of the soil, and his growth can the more easily be watched and directed.
The man from the country finds himself living under new conditions that may rapidly make or mar him.
He is away from the friends to whom he looked for guidance; he is cast on his own resources and must exercise an independent judgment; a temptation is not checked by the consideration of what the family would think; and having nothing but his own inclinations to consult, he is more likely to run loose than he would be when at home.
He is not necessarily more vicious or more foolish than his town-bred brother; but he is not accustomed to the same kind of temptations, and can neither resist them as well nor yield to them as gracefully.
He is therefore more likely to succumb, and more likely to suffer severely from the consequences if he is found out; for just as he is handicapped by the want of guidance, being a stranger he is not so likely to get proper assistance if he falls into trouble.
Men are attracted to the city by the hope of increase in pay and pleasure; and though in some respects the life seems unattractive enough, they still come.
The only people who are certain not to come, and perforce to stay, are those who have a home in the country and fixity of tenure there.
Their sons may and do invade the towns, but when they do not succeed there they return to the land.
Workmen in the country are as liable to lose their situations as townsmen; their work is hard and their hours of labour are long; they think their pleasures are few and dull compared to those men may have in the city, and they gravitate to it.
They are drawn in by its glitter, and driven in by the drabness of country life; sometimes also by the clearance of men to make way for the huge[Pg 97] pleasure-grounds that disgrace Scotland, and have resulted in the replacement of men who drew their subsistence from the soil (living a hardy life and rearing a healthy race) by deer and their keepers.
When the landless man comes to town and fails to find steady work, he cannot go back to the country unless the family of which he is a member have some hold on the land.
In the collieries in various parts of the West of Scotland large numbers of aliens are employed.
Their names, which in many cases are difficult either to pronounce or to spell, have been set aside by somebody or other and local names substituted; so that it is not uncommon to find a man with a familiar name who is quite unable to speak the language of the country.
They keep themselves apart, and do not usually interfere with others, but some of them get into trouble through fighting among themselves.
Ordinarily peaceable and tractable, they contribute a fair quota to the number[Pg 99] of serious assaults committed, though the person assailed is usually another alien.
Their ignorance of the language also makes them a source of danger to others.
When they have done some wild or criminal thing the culprits are deported, after they have served their term of imprisonment; but their isolation from the life of the district has in many cases contributed to the offences committed, since it has prevented them from acquiring the point of view of natives of this country and has caused them to follow the customs of their own land.
Any proposal to prevent their settling here would come with a very bad grace from us, whose relatives are scattered all over the globe and who pride ourselves on the fact.
They are healthy; and are neither wild nor intractable, but are generally industrious and steady.
In their interests and our own it is surely not advisable to permit them to continue as colonies apart, separated from us by the bar of language.
It would be no act of tyranny or hardship to insist that every alien settling here should, within twelve months of his arrival, satisfy the local authority of his fitness to speak the language sufficiently well to enable him to understand others and be understood by them.
At present it is no uncommon thing to find men who have been in the country for years and are yet unable to engage in the simplest conversation in English—or Scotch if you like.
In one homicide case the accused had been in the district for sixteen years, could only speak a broken dialect, and required to have the simplest statements interpreted to him.
In the city this condition of things is less marked, but as a general rule aliens—apart from the professionals—who are committed to prison do not speak the language[Pg 100] intelligibly, even though they have been some time in the country, and that for the same reason—they get on all right without it.
The Italians and others who are largely engaged in trading, pick up enough to enable them to understand and be understood; their occupation makes this a necessity; but even among them the interpreter is far too often required.
People are generally given to save themselves trouble; and to learn a language is troublesome.
If they can escape the necessity they will do so, and there is no need to blame them for it.
But their ignorance is a trouble and a possible danger to us, and it does not seem to be unreasonable to ask that it should cease.
There are other immigrant aliens who do speak the language and who are present in the large cities.
These are the professional criminals who import their vices, and work their business, in a very systematic way.
They are more remarkable for their knowledge of the law than for their ignorance of the language; and they are a very dangerous although not a very large element in the population.
They have an organised system of correspondence and go from one part of the country to another, where they have connections.
They employ skilled lawyers for their defence when they get into trouble, and within certain limits assist each other in the way of business.
There are some of them capable of any atrocity, and they are all quite different from the ordinary criminal of the professional class familiar to us here.
They have a certain amount of polish, and an aptitude for appreciating the standpoint of others sufficiently well to get on their blind side.
As for moral sense as we understand it, it does not seem to exist in them.
Crime is their business and they place business first.
When they are convicted they are deported, but their[Pg 101] resources and organisation enable them to escape conviction very often.
They require to be dealt with in a much more drastic way than the law at present permits; for they are not only a danger because of their depredations, but their presence and conduct incite our own undesirables to do things they would not otherwise attempt.
As the law stands the onus of proving their undesirability rests on the police, and it is very difficult to get positive evidence.
If they were required, on the initiative of the police, to prove to the satisfaction of a court that they were earning an honest living, they would find it impossible to do so.
It may be objected that this is like assuming a man to be guilty till he proves his innocence, which is contrary to practice and a bad principle on which to act.
As a matter of fact, it is acted upon with our native thieves, once they have been convicted; they may be charged with being found in possession of property and required to account for having it or go to prison; and they can be summarily tried.
In respect that a man is an alien he might reasonably be required to show that he is not living off the proceeds of crime, as a condition of his being allowed to remain in the country.
He may be refused permission to land if his character is known; but these people know how to get past the immigration authority.
Why they should then be free to transgress until they trip and are caught it is difficult to see.
If an alien seeks citizenship here he must satisfy the authorities that he has lived for at least five years in the country and during that period has been a reputable citizen.
The onus of proof is on him, and it is not assumed that because he has never been convicted he should be naturalised.
The examination to which he voluntarily submits in order that he may[Pg 102] become a British subject he need not undergo if all he wants is the protection of our laws while he is living by breaking them.
I suggest that just as some aliens have to submit to examination before being allowed to land, those who have given the authorities occasion to suspect that they are living by illegal means should be cited to appear before and satisfy a court that their conduct is such as to justify their being permitted to remain in the country; and failing their appearance, or their being able to do so, that they should be arrested and deported.
The millionaire and the pauper—Ill-feeling and misunderstanding—Social ambitions—Case of embezzlement—Preaching and practice—Gambling—The desire to “get on”—The need to deal with those who profit by the helplessness of others—Political action—Its difficulty—Legislation and administration—The official and the public—Personal aid—Fellowship.
OUR social inequalities are the cause of much serious crime.
That such inequalities always have existed is undeniable, and that they may continue to exist is at least likely; at any rate, there is no immediate prospect of their abolition; but the form and degree they take are variable.
Within recent times the gulf between the wealthy and the poor has been widened.
The pauper is an old inhabitant, but the millionaire is a new portent.
The rich man of our grandfathers’ day was a local magnate who might be capricious, but who could be personally approached.
The poor in those days were not so well informed as they are now that the ends of the earth have been brought together, and the mechanical inventions that have brought wealth to many have enabled the multitude to get a wider outlook on the world.
A rich man may be courted for his riches, but they do not now gain him reverence from the poor.
If free education has not educated the masses any[Pg 104] more than the expensive kind has educated many of the rich, it has enabled them to read.
They know more than they did, and with the access of knowledge discontent with their condition has increased.
For good or ill many of them have lost the fear of hell, but the fear of the poorhouse is still with them as with many who are better off.
The desire to make money dominates all sorts of people, and in the effort men are marred.
Each sees the greed of his neighbour, but fails to see that he shares the vices of those he condemns.
The man who is “successful” is critical of the faults of those less fortunate; and they in turn are often too ready to attribute his position to his absence of scruple rather than to any ability he may possess.
There is envy on the one side and distrust on the other; but out of, and in spite of, it all there is steadily growing an effort towards co-operation and mutual help.
In the welter of conflicting interests there is much done that every man would disapprove if he saw it done by his neighbour.
Yet those whose conduct is most shady are often not conscious of the enormity of it, being too much engrossed in the end they seek to be particular as to the means; and that end is not always an ignoble one.
They mean to do great things and kind when their ships come home; and they do not see that the question for each of us is not, What would we do if we had what we desire? but, What are we doing, being what we are and where we are?
In the thirst for wealth dishonest practices are condoned in business, and within the law robbery is allowed.
There is a disposition to take more account of what a man has than of what he is; and this cannot fail to have a vicious effect.
X 19 was a young man who held a position of trust and received a small[Pg 105] salary.
He had no showy vices and, so far as could be ascertained, not many others.
He was strong in the negative virtues; being an abstainer from drink, tobacco, and such things as are affected by pleasure-seekers and cost money.
His employers were quite satisfied that they had in him a model servant; but they found their mistake, and were as unreasonably indignant as they had been unreasonably pleased; for he had been conducting a very ingenious system of fraud upon them.
With the money he had abstracted he had been speculating in shares, and he had been successful up to a point.
If his last venture had turned out well he would have been able to resign his situation and live virtuously ever after, first paying back to them their money.
This is what he calculated would take place, and if his expectations had been realised nobody would have known of his misfeasance; but he lost on his venture and there was a crash.
He pleaded guilty to embezzlement and was sent to prison for a long period.
He had disposed of a considerable sum of money, but the curious thing about it was that he claimed that he was simply doing what his employers lived by doing—using other people’s money without consulting them as to details; though he admitted that in their case they were in a position to meet claims, and their clients knew that their money was not lying in a safe.
He took his sentence quite philosophically, with the remark that he had observed that people who had defrauded certain kinds of commercial corporations, such as banks, always got longer terms of imprisonment than those who merely robbed poor people; and as the firm that employed him was a big concern he would have to be made an example of.
He was shrewd in his observations, however wrong-headed they were in some respects, and he is[Pg 106] not the only young man who has taken the risk in the attempt to acquire riches and who has argued in the same way.
The number of those who are tempted to do so will diminish when it is shown that the successfully dishonest person is as much condemned by the opinion of those whose society he seeks as the failure is condemned by the law.
Men young and old go wrong in the endeavour to make a show.
They want position and are willing to pay for it even at the expense of others; indeed, there are many who spend as much effort and energy in intriguing to get a position they could not fill as, if properly applied, would enable them to qualify for it.
Some want to be social leaders, and exceed the limits of their income in the attempt.
So long as they merely get into debt their creditors are the losers, but there are limits to credit and their situation may offer them facilities for peculation.
The intention is to repay the money; but the honourable intention may be out of their power to execute, and the criminal act brings them to disgrace and ruin.
In all cases where the process has gone on for years without discovery, the offender is found to be firmly persuaded that he is rather an ill-used person, and that if he were only allowed time he would be quite able to show a balance on his side of the account.
This suggests the reflection that his conduct must have been often under review by himself, and a wonder as to how long he has taken to twist his mind to a belief in his own integrity in face of the facts; yet it is only some such belief that has enabled him to continue his defalcations.
It is sometimes matter for surprise to the public that men who have continued to embezzle funds for years should have appeared so respectable; but they are not acting a part; they have convinced themselves of[Pg 107] their uprightness through it all, and that is a very important step towards convincing others.
Even the Churches are not free from the imputation of making the end justify the means; and with lectures against gambling they sometimes run lotteries to obtain funds.
This does not show bigotry against gambling, but it can hardly help to drive home the objection to the vice.
The Press, which reaches a wider audience than the pulpit, is becoming more a means of making money for its proprietors than a medium for the formation of reasoned opinion; and some papers have organised sweepstakes under the thinnest disguise.
As for betting, there are numerous papers that depend on it for their profits.
Workmen and women pore over the betting news and run into debt to back a horse.
The misery that many entail on themselves and their dependents by this conduct is widespread, and efforts have been made to check it, but it does not seem to be diminishing.
As a rule it is safe to assume that people do not bet with the intention of losing, but with the hope of winning.
It is not harmless excitement they seek; it is money they want; and they argue that they are doing nothing different from what is done by wealthier people on the Stock Exchange.
They know as little about horses as those who speculated in rubber knew about that substance; and they have no interest in improving the breed.
They want to be rich without working, and they see that some men manage it.
The losers are forgotten; and what do they matter anyway if we win?
This spirit of selfishness and greed is not confined to the gambler, though it shows itself nakedly in his pursuit; and before it can be exorcised a better[Pg 108] conception of our duty to each other will require to be attained.
Meanwhile it is a small thing to prosecute bookmakers and those who deal with them, if the higher forms of gambling are left untouched.
The poor cannot afford to gamble and must be protected from themselves; but can anybody afford to gamble? Can the State afford to allow them to set such an example? The whole evil has been dealt with in a peddling spirit.
The bookmakers stand to win, whoever may lose, but they are not the people who gain most.
If the newspapers were prohibited from publishing betting news the machinery for the gamble would fall to pieces; but if this were attempted there would be a howl, for they are not without influence.
There always are difficulties when influential people have to be dealt with; and it is much easier to hit a little man than a big one—but the profit is less.
I do not say that there are not those who gamble for the sake of the excitement, but that these do not come to prison as a result.
The man who does run grave risk of landing there is he who gambles for the money that he may win but that he usually does lose.
The desire to shine among others is at the root of much of the foolish and criminal conduct of many men and women.
It is not necessarily an evil desire, but the methods adopted to secure admiration may result in evil.
There is much talk of the dignity of labour, side by side with the worship of money.
If people draw the conclusion that the dignity of labour means that one man should work that another may spend, they are likely to make an effort to escape the dignity.
They hear of the blessings of poverty, but they see that among them are not comfort and social[Pg 109] consequence; and in so far as they prefer these they will let anybody else have the blessings.
To admit that some must be poor if others are rich is not to accept the poor man’s lot for oneself.
So long as honest work is only given formal praise and poverty implies practical hardship, while the possession of money is allowed to create a presumption in favour of a man, there will be those who will seek to get it by any means in their power.
If we paid the homage to poverty that is given to wealth we might reasonably expect to find these people content to be poor; but while there is no likelihood of that being done, we may as well face the fact that our social inequalities result in the commission of crimes against property among a proportion of those who have a chance of helping themselves thereby.
The great mass of men and women—rich and poor—do keep free from grave offences, living their lives quietly and discharging their duties as citizens according to their light and their ability; but these false ideals stimulate many to the commission of crime.
It is well, therefore, to remind ourselves and others that ultimately a man is judged not by what he has but by what he is, and to recognise that a man is foolish if he sacrifices his life and dwarfs his personal development for any social advantage whatever.
The conditions which engender crime may be greatly modified and in many cases may be destroyed by political action.
Crime is largely a concomitant of city life, as we have it.
To live properly people need room, and so long as the present congestion exists all our efforts can at best palliate the evils which infest and infect us.
We may regulate the sale of drink in order to prevent drunkenness; we may classify our poor and attempt to relieve their poverty; but drink[Pg 110] and poverty are factors which remain comparatively inactive in the causation of crime, except where men are packed together to the degree in which we see them.
Let our cities continue to be hemmed in and built in the air instead of being spread over the earth, and we shall require additional sanitary regulations to combat disease and more police laws to cope with crime, while the numbers in our institutions will increase.
The city is the product of our industrial pursuits and the methods by which they are followed; but the city as it exists is no more necessary to the life of the community than the city before the day of Public Health Acts was a necessary part of our civilisation.
Men could live conveniently near each other and work at the same occupation, at least as efficiently, if they had room, as is possible under the cramping conditions that exist at present.
Man’s life ought to be something more than his work; and there will be more who work to live when there are not so many who merely live to work.
Reform your cities; or rather see that men are not allowed for their private interests or pleasures to “do what they like with their own” in defiance of the public welfare, and the cities will reform themselves.
The tenants of the crowded districts are hustled by the law, which in some cases they offend from sheer inability to do otherwise.
When those who make a profit by the existing conditions of affairs are as summarily dealt with there will be a possibility of improvement.
There are some landlords who assume the supervision of their property and of their tenants, but others are merely rent collectors; and their carelessness provides opportunity for the criminal classes to hide themselves.
So long as the law allows[Pg 111] men to make a profit by denying others access to the land except on payment of whatever ransom they choose to exact, the cities will remain crowded and the country will become depopulated.
When the landlord is made to pay if he will not let his land be put to its most profitable use, there will be less inducement for him to withhold it for a time in the hope of realising a famine price from the needs of the community.
It is poor policy to punish people for the results of the strain to which they are subject while those who profit by the cause are left alone.
But political action is slow and political parties are—what they are.
To most of us a change of Government means that Lord This is replaced by Mr.
That; probably relatives, and almost invariably belonging to the same caste; none of them particularly hasty in applying the remedies in which they believe—for when it comes to doing things instead of talking about them a great deal more depends on sentimental impressions, the result of friendly contact, than on intellectual opinions and political theories.
Politicians are like other people; their imagination can more readily picture the result of action as it affects their own friends than as it affects those of another social class.
Those who have a vested interest in the present conditions of things may personally suffer by any remedial change; and though there are many who are magnanimous enough to place the public gain before all else, there are far more who honestly cannot see that any measure whereby they would suffer a private loss can possibly be a public gain.
They are often very estimable persons, and knowledge of that fact paralyses the action of their friends who are politically opposed to them.
It would be so much more easy to remedy evils[Pg 112] if those who profited by their existence were only ill-natured and grossly selfish people; but when they are kindly and courteous it is a pity to push them.
Besides, they are often widows and orphans; for there is a remarkably high rate of mortality among the husbands and fathers of people who have money invested in land and in breweries.
There are other widows and orphans, however, who have no intimate friends in Parliament, and whose condition cannot appeal so powerfully to the imagination of Ministers because they belong to another class.
The trouble is that the measures that would aid one set of widows and orphans would hurt the other; and even when legislation is passed its action is delayed out of tenderness to existing interests.
There are many men in every Parliament who are anxious to remedy the bad conditions they see around them, and they are not confined to any side of the House; but there is no popularly elected body in the country where the private member has so little power.
In a Town or County Council he has a vote in the election of the executive, and if he is not pleased with the conduct of those whom he helps to office he can let them know the fact pretty effectively.
The Member of Parliament finds the Government formed without any consultation with him on the subject, and if he belongs to the same political party it is disloyalty for him to criticise Ministers unfavourably.
He is, however, allowed to praise and defend them, and this usually keeps him tolerably busy.
For the rest, he must never vote against them except on a subject that they count of little importance and on an occasion where they are quite sure of having a majority without him.
He must keep his own side in, no matter how much he disapproves of their conduct[Pg 113] of business; and he must recognise in practice that the men who lead are the party.
The people who sent him there may replace him at the first opportunity, but he will have the consolatory reflection that if the other side has got in it is only to behave in the same way.
Some other members of the families whose hereditary genius for governing the country has made us the great nation we are will fill the posts their relatives have vacated; and the electors will continue to have the shadow of representative government while the substance remains with their betters.
Whatever the laws may be, much will depend on their administration.
The more the Parliament is occupied in discussing legislation the less attention can it pay to administration.
The real executive power thus passes into the hands of the permanent officials; and the tendency is that they should direct, as well as carry out, policy.
As the public departments extend their activities they are brought more closely into contact, and it may be into conflict, with the lives of the citizens; and it is all the more necessary that the powers given to them should be exercised in consonance with the views of the representatives of the public, or the public servant may become the master of those he serves.
A man may be both able and zealous, but if his ability and zeal are employed in the wrong direction he is a greater danger than a stupid and lazy man would be; yet if he is not guided and directed in the path he ought to go he can hardly be blamed for following his own judgment.
The only security that public departments will act in accordance with public opinion lies in their intimate supervision by representatives of the public.
At present it is notorious that only a nominal supervision exists, and this is bad for everybody concerned; bad[Pg 114] for the Member of Parliament, for his constituents will not separate administration to which they may object from legislation which they may approve, nor his votes from the acts of the departments; bad for the officials, for the desire for power grows with its use, and the heads are in peril of confusing their will with the public interest and their prejudices with the good of the service, while their subordinates will be tempted to a servility that is fatal to faithful discharge of duty, if they get the idea that their comfort and their promotion depend without appeal on their chief; bad for the public, for it is a poor exchange to overthrow the tyranny of an arbitrary monarch and to live under the unchecked dominion of a Board.
This condition of things may seem far off yet to many, but it has arrived already so far as some of the poor are concerned, for they are hurried and worried and prosecuted by zealous officials for doing things they cannot avoid doing; and for my part I do not believe that that is in accordance with public opinion, though I do not attribute blame to the officials concerned, who are only acting according to their light.
Where there are an enlightened public opinion and a real public interest in affairs it is better for all concerned; and though Parliament may fail to deal with those whose interests conflict with public needs, there are many things that private citizens can do to mitigate existing evils, even although there were no new legislation passed.
Officials could be aided and encouraged to aim at the prevention of wrongdoing rather than at the punishment of the wrongdoer.
We might set about to see that more opportunities of reasonable recreation are provided, and to find out wherein and why our present provision fails.
Employers might take a greater interest in their[Pg 115] workers, and if they sought to learn from them would be in a better position to teach them.
The Churchman might easily come more closely into contact with some less fortunate member of the congregation and give kindly aid and counsel; or receive it, perhaps, where he would least expect it.
All of us might see, if we looked a little less to our own business and pleasure, that there are many around whose struggle is a sore one, and whom a friendly interest would help far more than any gift.
Many there are who, although neither able to pay nor to pray, could do much good and gain much by personal service.
It would help as nothing else can to a better understanding between us and our neighbours, and a more acute apprehension of the evil surroundings in which so many are compelled to live.
Men go wrong and keep wrong for the lack of good fellowship; and the conditions which keep them struggling in a crowd hinder the fraternising of man with man.
They were in a position which enabled them to give him the necessary attention when they learned what was required.
X 21 was a boy who had developed the habit of playing truant from school and had come under the observation of the attendance officer.
He was in danger of becoming an associate of city undesirables.
His mother was a decent widow who had to support him and herself by casual labour.
She was obliged to go out in the mornings to clean offices and he was left to himself.
She was loth to have him sent to an Industrial School, but she preferred that that[Pg 120] should be done to running the risk of having him get into the hands of vicious persons.
There was no question as to her rectitude, and as little of her ability to look after him when she had the power; but she could not be out working and at the same time be discharging her maternal duties in guiding him.
In a case like this—and they are not uncommon—it would be far better to free the woman from the need of leaving her child and see that she looked after him.
She has a greater personal interest in him than any official person can have and it need cost no more; while the gain in character cannot be measured in terms of cash.
The mother’s burden is greater than she can bear, and that is a reason for relieving it; but it is no reason for breaking up the family and loosening the tie between parent and child, and the practice cannot even be justified on the score of expense.
Boys get the name of being bad when they are intractable, but bad boys are fewer than bad men.
There are too many people who are driven to assume that they know what is best for the boy—or the man—and that without making any attempt to understand those for whom they prescribe.
When a boy rebels against the line of action laid down for him it is taken as evidence of his wickedness, though it may only show his good sense.
He may be doing the wrong thing with a purpose more reasonable than that of his mentor, but he is likely to find that his intention will meet with no sympathetic consideration even if he reveals it, and his action will meet with punishment if he owns it.
He is encouraged to lie in the hope of pleasing his master, and when he is found out his iniquity is magnified.
Boys are far more given to the attempt to find the[Pg 121] point of view of those who are in authority over them than grown-up people are to find the standpoint of the boy; and children will often show a deeper knowledge of their parents than the parents have of them.
If instead of assuming knowledge and showing ignorance parents would try to understand, there would be less disposition to rule the young by general prohibitions and a freer hand given to them in the choice of their pursuits.
Left alone, the child will show its bent; it is not for the parent to thwart its aptitudes, but to direct them into useful channels.
Many are made miserable by being set to books, and others are made equally wretched by physical drill.
The adult may keep free from its tyranny to some extent, but let it find a place in some code or other and every juvenile runs a grave risk of being subjected to it, because someone in authority who knows nothing about him or his needs has so ordered it.
The boy is kept at school for nearly as many hours in the week as many men work, and when he is set free from its restraint he runs wild—if he is not too tired, or if he has not been set tasks which cause him to work overtime at home.
He gets into mischief, and is denounced for his misdeeds and the trouble and annoyance he causes; but boys are not more mischievous than they were.
There are few adults who have not been a great nuisance to others in their own early days, but too many of them seem to have forgotten all about that.
By all means let the boy who has played some mischievous prank be restrained and corrected, but in choosing the method it might not be a bad plan to remember the exploits of a boy who was no better in his day than the culprit is, if no worse.
When we show that we recognise a clear[Pg 122] distinction between cramming juveniles with knowledge and educating them, they will learn at the school how to amuse themselves without annoying others.
At present they are in this respect left mainly to their own devices, and in very few cases is there any serious ground of complaint against them.
Considering their imitative tendencies and the incitements many of them have towards wrongdoing, it is wonderful how few go far astray.
When a boy is sent to a reformatory he has opportunities given him for play, and the importance of providing different forms of recreation for him is not ignored.
This is by some called “putting a premium on wrongdoing,” and yet in spite of the reward there are few boys who deliberately adopt a course of law-breaking in order to have the advantages of life in that institution.
Either they are too stupid or there is not such a bias on their part towards evil as some would have us suppose.
The recreation which forms part of the means adopted to reform the boy who has transgressed might conceivably prevent transgressions if it were placed within the reach of others, especially as the association of boys whose common interest is that they have all been before the courts is not likely to make for their improvement.
Whatever its defects as an educational institution, the school has this to its credit, that a better standard of conduct is maintained than could be acquired by many of the scholars if they were left to grow up under the conditions that obtain in their homes.
Now and then someone does a particularly shocking thing, and until quite lately when this occurred the offender was liable to be brought to the police court.
Now there is a special court for dealing with children, but as there is no change in the judge or in the officials before[Pg 123] whom the child appears, all that has been gained is his separation from older offenders.
This is something to be thankful for, but it is a minor mercy compared with what ought to be done.
He is more a subject for treatment by those whose experience enables them to understand children than a “case” to be tried by a magistrate whose traditions are those of the criminal courts.
Most of the charges are acts of malicious mischief or petty thefts.
The offenders have got out of parental control or have eluded the supervision of their parents.
In some cases the parents are culpably careless or negligent, taking little interest in their children and making their home worse than it need be.
They spoil the child without sparing the rod, for the boy is often hammered without mercy when he annoys them.
He keeps out of their way and may fall into bad company and bad habits.
Most of these boys show evidences of neglect in their appearance; but they are not, though they may become, desperadoes.
Others go astray not so much from the culpable neglect of their parents as because, with the best will in the world to guide the boy, the parent is either incompetent to do so from sheer stupidity, or, more frequently, from being too busily engaged in trying to make a livelihood to have the necessary time to give to his care.
A smaller number are the children of parents who are quite competent to look after them, but who have failed to keep themselves in sufficiently close touch with them—which is a more difficult thing to do than it seems.
At school the boy may be under good guardianship, but he is away from his mother during the greater part of the day, and he may pick up companions who will not exercise the most favourable effect on him.
They need not be bad, but they may be bad for[Pg 124] him.
Out of school hours he seeks for recreation, and in the effort to obtain amusement of a special kind he may take what does not belong to him, and be found out and complained of; or not be found out and continue the practice.
It is all very simple and not at all uncommon—except in the result.
Honesty has to be learned, and some people never learn it; though they never commit crimes.
There is a difference between being honest and being dishonest within the law.
There are few women or men who have not at some time or other “dishonestly appropriated property,” though they did not express it that way when they abstracted sweets well knowing the penalty if caught.
Some boys do not steal sweets, but they steal money to buy sweets; and in the same way others steal money to pay the price of admission to a place of entertainment.
Sometimes they break into shops to steal, and they are then young criminals; but this rarely happens when the necessary money can be picked up at home.
In a young person the desire for pleasure is naturally too strong to be at first repressed by a sense of the rights of property.
He does not need to be taught that sweets please the palate or shows delight the eye; but he requires to learn that in the long run honesty is the best policy.
Children are not likely to steal if they can get what they want without stealing, but they may help themselves when they can if they are subjected to unreasonable prohibitions.
Even men and women have been driven far out of the right path through attempts to repress their desires for harmless amusement and to make them take life solemnly.
The dishonesty of children arises not so much from a perverted nature as from an inability to appreciate the importance of honesty.
It is a phase that passes[Pg 125] as their experience of the world grows.
They can be trained out of it, but attempts to knock it out of them are as likely to knock it into them.
There ought to be provision made whereby parents could be advised, admonished, and assisted in dealing with children whom they have been unable to control.
Our Children Courts are not designed with this end in view, and I doubt whether it makes much difference to the child who is sent to one of our institutions that he was sent from one room in the courthouse rather than from another.
Our money would be better spent in assisting parents who have the will to do well by their children, but who have not the power, than in taking the children away from them.
As for those who are careless of their children, they should be dealt with for their carelessness.
In many cases the apathy they show is a consequence of our methods.
If, instead of taking the children away from those who neglect them, we trained and assisted them, we should have better parents and better children.
If carelessness and callousness were then shown by the parents we could proceed with justice to deal with them for culpable misconduct.
At present we are not in a position to do so, since we are not prepared to help them to discharge their responsibilities.
We make it easier for them to neglect than to care for their offspring, and if they lose control of them to a sufficient extent we free them from the burden altogether.
The spirit of enquiry and experiment leads many boys into mischief, and some of their malicious acts are the result of it.
Men too readily forget that the boy sees things in a quite different light and relationship from them.
Some of the housebreaking adventures that look so bad on a charge-sheet appear quite different when the story is told from the boy’s[Pg 126] standpoint, and they do not always show such depravity as one would expect.
Some boys are always seeking adventures and becoming absorbed in them; others are content to read about deeds of daring, and the works they favour are often crude enough.
Occasionally one is taken with a mask and pistol in his possession attempting to rob in the highway, and then we have homilies on the evils of pernicious literature of the “Dick Turpin” sort, which might be more convincing if the homilists were themselves free from connection with stuff that is worse.
The adventurous boys are not those who read much of any kind of book; they are too busy living.
The “Blood” is devoured more by the boy who dreams rather than acts; but of the thousands of men who as boys read prohibited books and enjoyed them, few are likely to spend much time on the equally sensational publications that circulate in millions among adults.
On the whole, the boy will not get a more distorted view of life from the highly coloured papers he reads than he would obtain from some of the newspapers; and when he is being condemned for his preference for “Bloods,” it would not be amiss to remember that these productions have never set themselves to foment in his mind feelings of ill-will against people of other lands.
It is not the boys but the adults who are raised by the papers they read into hysterical outbursts of senseless rage or equally senseless fear now of one and now of another continental power; and if “literature” is to be judged by its apparent effect, then these papers are more pernicious than the “Bloods,” which the boy prefers to the books which are designed for his moral instruction.
There is no comparison between his highwayman—a boy’s highwayman who robbed the rich and gave to the poor, to the[Pg 127] inversion of all social order—and the industrious apprentice who married his master’s daughter, poor girl.
The hero is a hero to him because he dares all risks, is true to his friend, is gallant and generous, and faces death with a brave heart.
If he does the wrong thing he does it in the right way, and it is not the thief but the man who gains the boy’s admiration.
As for the industrious one, even a boy knows that there are not enough masters’ daughters to go round; and if he revolts at the selfishness of the gospel of getting on, he is right in rejecting such a false basis of morals.
We know that the boy’s Robin Hood or Dick Turpin never existed in fact; but if they exist in his fancy?
To those who denounce them these papers are only a glorification of theft of a particular kind, but there is no likelihood of its ever coming into vogue again.
Dick Turpin is now a company-promoter and his cheques are in demand by Churches and political parties.
He does not risk his life now, and we are very glad to be taken into his confidence; but the boy has not found that out yet.
His books may be ill-chosen, but wholesale condemnation will not mend the matter; and in books, as in other things, it is impossible to tell what is good for the boy till something more is known about him than that he is a boy.
When he reads it is safe to assume that he does so because he feels some need is supplied thereby.
When its nature is discovered a step will be made towards its better supply, but not before.
To take the boy away from the book he likes to a standard author on the ground that it is better for him, is to run the risk of creating in him a permanent dislike for the books chosen.
In the city most of the boys leave school when they are fourteen years of age, and entering on new pursuits are subject to fresh temptations.
The[Pg 128] employment they obtain is largely a matter of chance, but whatever it may be, they are less likely to go wrong when engaged at it than when free from it.
Their playground is the street, and there is no adequate provision made for their recreation.
On payment of a small sum they may obtain admission to the music-halls or the picture-shows, and these latter are largely patronised by boys.
That they serve a useful purpose is undeniable, and if the entertainment they offer may not be all that is desirable, it is practically all that is to be had by many.
Since it cannot be had freely there are temptations to find the means, and the boy amongst his neighbours who is worst off in respect of money is hardest pressed.
It is deplorable that some should yield to the temptation to obtain money dishonestly, but it is idle to ignore the condition of things and neglect to provide reasonable opportunities for the recreation which is required after work done.
There are private organisations taking the matter in hand, but their appeal, though wide, is, and must be, sectional.
Boys’ Brigades in connection with the Churches can only reach a minority of the juvenile population, and the same statement applies to Boy Scouts.
There are those who object on principle to both organisations on the ground that they foster the military spirit, but the militarists themselves do not appear to share this view.
Boys like to play soldiers, but when they get sense they drop that; and meantime they play, greatly to their advantage.
As for the Scouts, they seem to represent an improved edition of “follow my leader,” and their uniform prevents their being interfered with while they play.
It does none of them any harm to believe that they are saving their country so long as they are really saving themselves, and no greater number of them develop a taste[Pg 129] for a soldier’s career later in life than enlist from among those who have never belonged to one or other of the organisations.
It may be that the intention of some of the promoters is to feed the army, but that is to leave out of account the boys themselves and the development of their minds.
Whatever the intention, the result is good in so far as the interest of the game keeps the boys in healthy exercise.
The most popular of all the forms of public recreation is the football match.
Week after week the grounds are filled by tens of thousands of spectators who find in the game they witness not only amusement for the time, but matter of conversation and interest which outlasts the day.
Young and old they are mostly partisans, and though their conduct may leave much to be desired, that should not distract the observer’s attention from the main fact, which is that they are enabled to find a real interest in something which is at least harmless.
There are those who lament the fact that the spectators are not players, and who condemn them for being merely vicarious partakers in the game.
As a matter of fact, a good many of them have played, and some of them have got into trouble for playing.
A very little acquaintance with the facts would make the Jeremiahs aware that there is no public provision made for allowing very many to play; that a great many who enjoy seeing others play have no time when free from labour to practise much themselves, even if a field were near; and that if any large number began to play football in the only spaces open to them—the streets—there would be no room to get about.
It is not a bad plan to consider men’s limitations before condemning their pursuits, but it is too little practised.
The football match is a strong counter-attraction[Pg 130] to the public-house or the aimless wander through the streets, and the football field would be an admirable playground for many of the young, as they would readily admit; but those who want them to play rather than to look on are never very prominent when an attempt is made to find them the means.
Some of them use the public streets for a practice ground, greatly to the annoyance of the passengers and sometimes to their danger.
The nuisance has to be stopped and the usual method is adopted; the universal panacea for all evils is applied, and the culprits are taken in charge by the police.
A small fine is inflicted, with the alternative of imprisonment if the lads are over sixteen.
I have seen a batch of them brought to jail because their fines had not been paid.
All that had been done was to ensure that these boys would not play football in the streets for several days; yet the cost of their escort and board during that time, if expended on the hire of ground, would have provided them and others with opportunities of play for six months; and they do not play in the streets for choice—at least it has not been demonstrated that they do.
Alike in work and in play the boy’s pursuits are largely matter of chance.
He has to seek employment and is generally ready to take anything that presents itself.
Some of the situations that offer most attractions to him are of such a character as to prevent him from applying himself to work at which in his manhood he could earn a living.
One tries to outdo another; other “corners” hear about and imitate the desperadoes; the newspapers take the matter up; and the place is in a state of terror.
There is reason for the terror, too; for in the process unoffending and peaceful citizens have suffered serious injury.
The[Pg 137] professional criminal, who is quick to take advantage of any chance, hangs on to the tails of the foolish lads, and under cover of their depredations helps himself to what he can get.
Anything that gathers a crowd helps him, but he knows better than to commit assaults of this purposeless kind himself.
He has no objection to rob the assaulted or the threatened and terrorised parties, however, provided he can conceal himself.
If he can get any of the lads who began the proceedings to assist him, good and well; but in that case they may find they have started on a new and criminal career.
The loose cohesion between the mischievous and the criminal elements in the crowd becomes organised; and by this time there is a general demand on the part of the citizens that somebody should be punished.
But the very fact that the outrages have been advertised, while it causes their imitation at first, makes parents and employers enquire into the conduct of their sons and their workers.
The lads are kept in at night, or they are otherwise separated from each other.
When the association begins to break up the process is not long before it is complete.
Everyone who leaves it is suspected of being a possible informer, and the dread of they know not what—the most powerful kind of fear—invades their minds.
The conduct that seemed so laudable is now given up and the epidemic dies out.
To send one of the offenders to prison is simply to make him a martyr in the eyes of his associates, who know that he is no worse than they were and who sympathise with rather than abhor him.
The real deterrent is the action of the parents and employers who know the lads.
They neither want to get into trouble at home nor to lose their jobs.
Those who are sent to prison have often little to do with the[Pg 138] matter, and their exemplary punishment has less.
Real hooliganism—the existence of young professional thieves who are in the habit of committing brutal assaults and inflicting injuries recklessly on their victims—is rare in Glasgow.
The young person is more likely to fall into error than his elders because of his inexperience.
Whatever the law may hold, no business man expects the kind of service from a youth that he looks for from a man.
The young man may have more knowledge than his senior and more recent information on many things, but only time can enable him to co-relate his knowledge.
The question whether a lad knows right from wrong is all that some people will consider; which shows how little they know, if they really believe that the answer will enable anyone to assess a man’s responsibility.
We are taught “right and wrong” from our earliest years by way of principles to guide us, but they are not always easy of application.
The difference between a young and an old man is one of experience.
Practice has enabled the one to use his knowledge in a way that the other has yet to learn.
Our conceptions of many things on which we have been given information apparently full and accurate have been proved time and again to be quite wrong; experience enables us to discount our anticipations, but it only comes with years.
In judging young people it is specially necessary to bear in mind the fact that with all their apparent knowledge they may have totally wrong conceptions of things, and that thus they have been misled.
On many occasions I have had to note the fact that a young man had committed an atrocious crime; that he knew perfectly well it was wrong; that it was not due to imperfect powers of control; that he had brooded over and visualised it before the act; and that[Pg 139] its accomplishment had left him shocked beyond expression, for it was all so different from his conception of it.
No punishment could intensify the shuddering horror with which these lads regarded their own acts, “so different from what I thought it would be”; and yet in ordinary affairs we are well acquainted with the phenomenon.
Why we should lose sight of it when a crime has been committed and we are seeking to unravel the causes is a mystery.
Know right from wrong? Yes, and conceive the whole matter wrongly.
This state of mind is not peculiar to the criminal, and may sometimes be present in those who take upon themselves to judge and condemn him.
In early life a lad is not only more liable to go astray, but having fallen it is more difficult for him to recover.
He is more impressionable, and the impression of his crime and of the way in which he has been treated stands in his way.
He has no record of experience behind it to which his memory can turn and by which he can be helped to seek the right road when he leaves prison.
“Learn young, learn fair,” is as true of crime as of other things.
At the opposite end of the path of life a special cause of crime is degeneration of the physical or mental powers.
In the first case the man may become destitute and forced into criminal courses in order to gain a living.
In the latter case he may develop tendencies and commit certain offences that are quite at variance with his former conduct.
As a result of senile changes in body and mind some old men offend against the law.
When the condition is marked they are dealt with for it, but in some cases it is only suspected and is not capable of proof.
It is simply a question of whether they should be sent to prison or to a lunatic asylum.
The position of woman—The posturing of men—Love and crime—Two cases of theft from sexual attraction—The female thief—Case—Blackmailing—Jealousy and crime—Two murder cases—Case of assault—Fewer women than men are criminals—Their greater difficulty in recovery—Young girls and sexual offences—Perils of girlhood—Wages and conduct—Exotic standards of dress—Ignorance and wrongdoing—The domestic servant—Her difficulties—Concealment of pregnancy cases—The culprit and the father—Morals—The fallen woman—Bigamy.
FOR good or ill great changes have taken place, and more are likely to occur, in the relative social and political positions of the sexes.
Women are excluded from political power on the ground of their sex, and by way of opposing or of justifying this condition of matters everything but sex is discussed.
It has been shown that woman is as clever as man; pays her rates at least as promptly; can work as hard and at as varied occupations; is capable of outstripping him in learning; shows as much intelligence; is more moral; and can sometimes be a greater nuisance to her neighbours.
All which may be a very good reason for giving her a vote, but does not alter the fact that there is a great difference between the sexes.
That may be no reason for excluding her from a share in the direct election of representatives to Parliament, but it is a fact that cannot be lost sight of and which seems to be forgotten[Pg 141] when it is not deliberately minimised by both parties to the controversy.
Man is something more than his brain, and so is woman.
Indeed, their thoughts and their acts are often the outcome of the condition of their other organs; and the attraction of one sex for the other disturbs most frequently the calculations of observers.
Among the primitives in our own country the principal subject of interest, after their means of subsistence—and occasionally before even that—is the opposite sex; and if one may judge by the books in greatest demand, those whose opportunities are more varied are far from indifferent to the same subject.
The young man who is not stirred by desire to excite admiration in some girl—perhaps in all girls—is an exceptional being; at least he feels uncomfortable in their presence.
The love of attracting attention is very common, but while it causes men to do many strange things to obtain praise from their own sex, it much more frequently moves them to extraordinary actions in order to secure the admiration of women.
Whether men or women are most moved by this feeling it is impossible to say, but the men are more likely to make fools of themselves.
Their present social position gives them greater opportunities to do so; for the woman’s training and traditions are against her openly giving way to her feelings, and when she does so the result is apt to be disastrous.
It is the commonest thing in the world to see young people posturing to attract the attention of those of the opposite sex, and their feelings may blind them to the consequences of their conduct.
A too intense interest in anything else is fatal to business, and the rule has no exception in favour of the amorous; so it is not uncommon for a lad to lose his place through inattention to his work, the result[Pg 142] of preoccupation in his love affairs.
In some social stations this condition of mind may lead the lad into criminal courses.
X 22 was an intelligent lad who had drifted into crime and continued in it.
He had not offended against the law as a boy, though he had passed his early years in a part of the town where the sights are appalling and the prevailing tone of morals is low.
He spent the later years of his boyhood in a suburban village and went to work in that district.
When he was about seventeen there was an epidemic of “club dancings”; that is to say, places where a number of young men, having hired a room and a fiddler, charged others a small sum for admission to dance—girls being admitted free—and divided the profits or the losses among themselves afterwards.
The dancers were usually the sons and daughters of respectable people, but their behaviour after the dance was not innocent.
The more ardent among them became passionately addicted to the practice of attending such places and dropped both work and reputation in the process.
The scandal of the thing ultimately became so great that under the pressure of public opinion the “clubs” were discontinued.
At one time they were many in number and spread over a wide area.
The young man of whom I speak was an enthusiastic devotee and went far afield at times to seek his pleasure.
Working from early morning and dancing till late at night, it was morning again before he got home.
He could not possibly keep up both the work and the pleasure, and the work had to go.
He had to find money, and he got it dishonestly at less fatigue than by work.
After being in prison he found the door of some of the clubs closed to him, but there were others.
He did not escape so readily now when he stole, being known; and gradually[Pg 143] he was shut out from the pleasures that had led him astray and shut into the company of those who, like himself, had been in prison.
He was only one of a number whose downfall was attributed to dancing; but he had not the slightest doubt that if the dancing had been between those of the same sex it would never have led him off his feet.
It was the sexual element in the matter that attracted him.
In this case the man lost his regular employment through absorption in his pursuit of women, but in many more cases the situation is forfeited through dishonesty caused by the desire to make an impression on some girl or to provide for her.
X 23 was a lad of good character, quiet in his manner, well educated, and employed in a position of trust.
He was serious and sober in his walk and conversation, and appeared likely in time to become a pillar of the Church and a model citizen.
He was attracted by a girl who was of good reputation, and there was never any suggestion of improper conduct on the part of either of them.
She lost her situation through no fault of her own, and he placed her in a house which he furnished at the expense of his employers, expressing his intention to marry her later.
Those who knew him were surprised that he should be able to make the provision for her that he did—surprised also at his choice of her as a wife; but that is not an uncommon attitude on the part of friends—and equally surprised and pained when it was discovered that he had used money which was not his own in order to set up the establishment.
It would be easy to multiply examples of cases where the relations between the parties are less innocent, and to show that not merely young men, but men who[Pg 144] are advanced in life, have been driven by the attraction of the other sex to sacrifice their position.
Women are not ignorant of their power, and the criminal among them know how to use it to advantage.
Because of their sex they are able to commit many thefts and to escape with impunity; indeed, a very large proportion of thefts from the person are committed by women, or with their assistance.
They attract the man, go along with him, pick his pocket, and find some excuse to get rid of him in a hurry.
When he discovers his loss they are out of reach, and in the great majority of cases he says nothing about it to the police, as to do so would cause scandal about himself.
Only when the loss is too considerable to be borne, or when something is stolen that cannot be replaced, is the theft reported; and even then it is difficult to convict the thief.
X 24 is a girl of twenty-six who has several times during the last eight years been convicted of theft.
She is a buxom and cheerful young woman, neither a teetotaler nor intemperate, shrewd, and possessed of a considerable share of intelligence and humour.
Brought up in a slum district, she was early at work; and when she began her present career she was earning honestly about fourteen shillings weekly.
Some time ago I was asked to see her on behalf of a lady who had taken an interest in her from her appearance in court, and who was willing to help her to a better way of living.
She was perfectly frank with me, and declined assistance on the ground that she could do better for herself.
She said that with very little trouble she could make twice the amount to be gained by work, and with little risk.
“You ken weel enough, doctor, that the lady could do nothing for me.
She would put me in a place among her servants, maybe, and that would be a nice thing for the servants![Pg 145] Na, na.
As long’s the drink disna get a grip o’ me I’m a’ richt; and there’s no much fear o’ that.” Like others of her class, she does not live by prostitution, though her sex is her decoy.
She has no prejudice in favour of chastity, but she takes very good care to run no unnecessary risks, and will find a means of getting away from the man she may pick up—if possible with his purse, but if not, then without it—before matters have proceeded to an extremity.
Others acting in concert with male accomplices lure men to houses where they are bullied and robbed; and this goes on with a degree of impunity that would be amazing, were it not for the fact that though the practice is well known, there are few of those who have suffered loss of money who care to add to it the loss of reputation that would result if they had to appear in court.
Blackmailing is another practice that springs from the conduct of both men and women influenced in the direction of vice and crime by sex impulses; and jealousy is a powerful factor in the causation of some crimes of violence.
Jealousy is not generally looked for on the part of those who are themselves loose in their conduct, but among them it may exist as intensely and manifest itself as powerfully as in any respectable citizen.
It seems to be largely a matter of temperament, and to be to some extent existent apart from the desire for exclusive possession.
X 25 was an ex-soldier married to a woman of low morals.
They had both been loose in their behaviour and were both given to drink.
He had on several occasions assaulted her for her infidelities, but he admitted that it was not jealousy that had caused him to do so; and he owned that he was just as bad himself.
He went off to the war, and in his absence she[Pg 146] behaved very badly and took headlong to drink.
On his return he took up house with her, and the other man was a source of quarrel between them, especially when they were drinking.
He was admittedly jealous, though there does not seem to have been any but a retrospective cause for the feeling.
One day in the course of a quarrel she compared him with the other man to his disadvantage, and he savagely set on and killed her.
X 26 was a sailor who was attached to a woman whom he knew to be a prostitute.
When he came to Glasgow he lived with her, quite well knowing her character.
He spent his money freely on her, but could not keep her from her associates.
One night she insisted on leaving the house where they lodged.
She had been drinking heavily, and he tried to detain her.
She insisted on going to the lodgings of another man whom he knew; and when he endeavoured to persuade her to remain where she was, she made a comparison between him and the other that set him in a blind fury of rage and jealousy, in which he killed her.
The cases present similar features: a tolerance of general infidelity; a jealousy of a particular individual; and an explosion when the other was praised for certain qualities.
One day in the airing-yard of the prison a woman who was usually quiet in her behaviour made a sudden attack on another who had been admitted to prison on the preceding day.
It transpired that the assailant had heard that the woman she assaulted was living with “her man.” The man was a bloated blackguard whom she had screened by pleading guilty to a charge of theft in which he was implicated.
She herself was a prostitute, and when I pointed out that morally he could not be worse than she in that respect she[Pg 147] admitted the fact, but added furiously that she would not allow that—to take him from her; although she was ready enough to recognise his worthlessness.
It would be easy to theorise on these cases, and it might be interesting; it is well to note them, for they show that crime may result from passion in circumstances where it might not be expected.
The fact is that feelings the result of sex strike far deeper and wider than many good people care to acknowledge; but the whole subject is one on which a taboo is placed and it cannot be treated as frankly as it ought for that reason.
The cause of jealousy and the excitement of the feeling is not so simple as many seem to think.
It may be absent where there would appear to be the strongest ground for expecting its presence, and present under circumstances where it would not be looked for; and when present it may induce criminal acts on a provocation that would appear small indeed.
There are fewer female than male criminals and offenders, but they are more likely than men to continue in the wrong way when they set out on it, for it is more difficult for them to recover.
Women are much harder on one another than they are on men; or than men are, either on their own sex or on women.
This may be one reason why so few of them go astray, but it also contributes to keep the stray sheep from getting back to the fold.
The girl is more closely guarded at home and is more intimately associated with her mother than the boy is.
Even mothers who have gone to the bad do not always want their daughters to follow their example; and I have known those who lived by vice and crime who have sent their daughters away from them in order to be trained in religion and morals.
Most of them cannot do that, but many do[Pg 148] what they can, up to a point, to keep them straight.
A girl suffers more than a boy from the neglect of a mother, and when to neglect is added bad example it may have a fatal effect on her.
In proportion to their numbers there are more daughters than sons of criminal mothers who take to evil courses.
Apart from the mother, there are districts of the city where girls hear language and see sights that are not likely to have a good effect on them.
The girl is taught to repress herself more than the boy and is trained towards secretiveness.
The boy is rather given to flaunt his new-found naughtiness and to be checked for it or to discover of how little account it is.
It is a mistake to suppose that because a man or woman never uses objectionable language, or repeats objectionable stories, they have not left an impression when heard.
As a matter of fact, the female side of any lunatic asylum is generally more remarkable than the male side for the foulness of the language of the inmates and the filthiness of their ideas.
Among the sane members of the community the opposite is notoriously the case, but the insane are only repeating words that have lodged in their mind when they were sane.
The same thing is true of female offenders; they outdo the men in the profanity and indecency of their language, when they begin.
When as a result of their surroundings young girls take to imitating their elders in vice they are much more dangerous than boys.
Every surgeon in a great city, if he is connected with the administration of the law, knows that very young girls are sometimes made the subjects of horrible assaults; but he also knows that other girls as young incite and provoke assaults, and that some among them make the most terrible and detailed charges against men on no foundation[Pg 149] whatever but that of their own imagination excited by what they have seen.
When men are guilty of certain offences under the Criminal Law Amendment Act there can be no defence of their conduct; they have no excuse for taking advantage of young girls; but it is sheer folly to ignore the fact that there are girls of school age in some parts of the city who deliberately importune men.
It is terrible that it should be so, but they are only doing what they see their elders do and there is no use disregarding the fact.
If the street is a bad playground for the boy it is worse for the girl.
She runs greater risks and her ignorance is as vast as his.
Her choice of occupation is more restricted, and her wages, though they may not be less in the first instance, do not increase in the same ratio as she grows to youth and womanhood.
Whatever may be said for the higher education of women it is out of reach of the many.
Most girls have the idea that some day they will be married; and they are often right.
When this idea is present it is bound to affect their actions.
Marriage means for a man the holding on to his work; for a woman it implies the giving up of her employment—at any rate, in Scotland most men who marry try to keep their wives at home.
Among the poorer labourers this is not always possible; but it remains true that the great majority of married women are not industrially employed.
They have quite enough to do at home, and sometimes more than enough; but the fact that the home is to be their permanent sphere of work, or the hope of this, makes many girls and women careless as to the choice of their occupation meanwhile.
It also prevents combination among workers, to a large extent, and tends to keep wages low.
How some of them live on their earnings[Pg 150] is a mystery, but they do; and keep themselves in a condition of health and fitness which will compare favourably with that of many of the scientific people who prove by figures and standards that they don’t.
There is grave risk in it, however; risk that they should not be asked to run.
If they were not members of a family, each contributing earnings to a common pool, and each undertaking a share of the household work, many could not exist on the wages they receive.
That any large number of them are directly driven to the street by the low rate of their wages is not, in my experience, true.
Complaints have been made that the children of well-to-do people accept lower wages and make it hard for those who have to earn their living to obtain reasonable pay.
This may be true in a few cases, but it is not of general application.
These people do not compete at all in many occupations; their parents are not foolish enough to let them do much for nothing; but they do sometimes exercise an injurious influence on the other girls by their presence.
Girls are at least as vain of their appearance as lads, and they are quite as much given to personal adornment.
Indeed, I think men will readily admit that women pay more attention to their dress and are keener on ornaments than they are.
Certainly when one gets a new kind of hat-pin or “charm,” others must obtain something to balance it.
If a girl has a fund to draw upon apart from her earnings she is likely to dress more expensively than her neighbours, and the weaker sisters are sometimes tempted to adopt extraordinary measures to keep pace with her.
In so far as a standard of dress is set up that is beyond the earning power of the workers to maintain, girls who have other resources than their wages are[Pg 151] liable to exercise an injurious effect on their fellow-workers.
X 27 was a young woman of prepossessing appearance and good manner.
She had been employed in a place of business in town.
Her wages were small, and she had charge of cash transactions to a considerable amount.
She was arrested on a charge of embezzlement and she admitted her guilt.
She confessed that she had begun to take small sums in order to keep herself “respectable,” and her peculations not being discovered, she had continued to help herself.
There was sickness at home, and to relieve the pressure there she had taken larger sums and been found out.
In the course of enquiries I found that there were other employees none of whom had her opportunities of taking from the cash-box, but some of whom dressed themselves on “presents” from gentlemen.
There was room for suspicion that each knew what the others had been doing.
It was certain that they knew that their earnings were insufficient to enable them to live and dress as they did, and it was equally clear that in their cases they had no resources at home to supplement their earnings.
There are some workshops in which the moral tone is very low, and the association of young girls together in them has a bad effect on their conduct.
The ignorance of many men and women with regard to the most elementary physical facts is remarkable.
Mysteries are made of physiology, as though innocence and ignorance were synonymous terms.
Fear takes the place of enlightenment, and when a girl is seen to transgress the limits of conduct laid down for her without the dreadful consequences they have been led to expect, the others are apt to think they have been misled; and some of them embark lightly on[Pg 152] a certain course of conduct with a confidence begotten of ignorance as great as that which once made them timid.
Young people are better to learn the truth about themselves from those they respect and trust, than to be kept in ignorance till some chance reveals a distorted version to them.
X 28 was a man of the labouring class who was charged with contravention of the Criminal Law Amendment Act.
He had been a very hard-working man, and for years had lived on little and saved the greater part of his earnings.
Then, as systematically as he had put the money past, he started to get rid of it.
He had nearly £200, and he proceeded to spend about £2 a week on his “spree.” He drew the money from the bank in small sums, and, doing no work meanwhile, he proceeded to take enough drink to keep him on the right side of drunkenness.
This had been going on for over six months before his arrest.
Early in the course of his wanderings he had made the acquaintance of two girls who were employed in a tailoring establishment in the city.
In time he was introduced by one girl to another during the succeeding four months, till he had dealings with seven in the same establishment—that is to say, seven admitted the facts.
Their ages ran from fifteen to nineteen years, and without exception they were all the daughters of respectable parents, to whom the story of their conduct came as a severe shock.
That story will not bear repetition; it was exceedingly gross.
The facts were only discovered in an accidental way through the illness of one of the girls.
She at first denied everything; but under pressure made a confession of part of the truth, and, the charge being laid, enquiry elicited the rest.
[Pg 153]A large number of girls are still employed in domestic service, though the tendency has been for them to seek industrial work, where they are for some part of the day their own mistresses.
The spread of elementary education has been blamed for the shortage in the supply of servants, but it is only one of many causes for the change from the time when there were more girls seeking work than places for them; and girls are not likely to seek service as a result of the railings of those who, to judge by their utterances, are in need of some elementary education with regard to their own position.
There seems to be an idea fixed in their heads that they have a right to be served by others, and that on their own terms.
If the schools have taught the girls that they are not born to do for others what they ought to be able to do for themselves, it is something to the credit of the schools.
Domestic servants have been too long treated as though they were inferior beings, with the natural result that their work has come to be looked upon as lower in character than that of the factory or the office girl.
A greater independence of spirit and behaviour is permitted in those engaged in industrial occupations than in domestics, and this has a good deal to do with the preference shown for these pursuits.
Domestic service is a better preparation for married life than work in a factory, but in spite of this it has very serious disadvantages.
It presents the form of family life without the spirit.
In a great many cases it has all the disadvantages and few of the advantages.
Those who are loudest in their complaints of the degeneration of servants show quite clearly that they are angry really because they no longer get girls to give not only reasonable service, but the obedience of flunkeys.
Girls in workshops are not treated as[Pg 154] domestics are; they would not stand it.
Their wages may be lower, but at least they are not looked upon as beings of another creation than those placed over them.
When people shun certain kinds of employment it is not generally because they are foolish, but because they believe that that kind of work is not worth having.
Her mistress is quite ready to assume that she should know all that the girl is doing, but the confidence is expected to be all on the one side.
For the mistress to interfere in the girl’s affairs is to show a proper interest in her; but for the girl to return the compliment is impertinence.
The girl is often subject to unsympathetic supervision; she is seldom allowed out to associate with those whose company she desires; her life is a monotonous and exacting one; and in many cases she has as few opportunities for seeing visitors as she has for visiting.
That some should react unfavourably to these conditions is not surprising; and when they are out they may show the same tendency to friskiness displayed by that other domestic animal, the family dog.
Many of them have few friends near the place of their employment, and their work does not provide them with the same facilities for forming friendships as industrial employment does.
If they do go astray the consequences are therefore more serious, because they are to a large extent thrown on their own resources, having few to whom they can appeal for help or advice.
There are no workers who are more generally industrious, honest, and patient, and who are more harshly judged.
Only those who go wrong seem to attract attention; at least it is only they who are heard of; and in proportion to the large number employed they are few.
Their position away from their family leaves[Pg 155] them more exposed to the attentions of those of the opposite sex than other girls, and when they succumb the consequences may be more serious.
If their condition is suspected or discovered the extent to which they are considered members of the family soon becomes apparent.
The girl who is in this state has no illusions on that subject.
She knows quite well that she will receive no sympathy, and that would not matter so much if she were not equally certain that she will be turned out whenever the fact becomes known.
She fears the scandal she will bring on them, and what she should do is a puzzle to her.
What she tries to do is to conceal her condition as long as possible.
She knows quite well that a time will come when it will unmistakably reveal itself, but anything may happen in the interval.
She refuses to think about the future and lives in the present.
The effort that should be expended in making preparations for the event is spent in concealing its approach; till some day she finds herself a mother.
The habit of concealment has become a part of her, and it asserts itself in the state of pain and panic in which she finds herself, with disastrous results to the child.
X 29 was a girl about twenty years of age who came from a mining district to domestic service in Glasgow.
One day her mistress had reason to suspect that something had taken place in the house of which she had not been made aware; and a search revealed the dead body of a new-born child in an outhouse.
In due course she was transferred to prison, where I had to investigate the case with a view to determining her mental condition.
When she became aware of her condition she took[Pg 156] steps to hide it, and up to the end she had been successful in doing so.
She did this in order to make up her mind what she ought to do.
Sometimes she decided to go home to her friends, and at other times she meant to apply to the parish.
At last she made up her mind to go home, and had written stating her intention, but saying nothing about her condition or about staying there.
The child was born the night before the day she had fixed for her visit.
She was taken by surprise, and had no preparations made for its arrival.
By her actions she showed that she knew what was necessary in order to attend both to child and mother.
It cried out, and in her alarm she stopped its mouth.
It did not cry again, and she next set about its concealment.
She knew that she had killed it, but she did not think this murder.
She would have thought it murder if it had not just been new-born.
She had seen similar cases reported in the newspapers as “Concealment of Pregnancy” and not counted murder.
As she had her day off to pay her visit she did so.
She hoped to be able to dispose of the body, but her mistress had found suspicious signs in her room, and on a search had discovered the child.
She was curiously knowing in some respects, but her ignorance was as peculiar as her knowledge; and I had no reason to doubt the truth of her story, which stood such tests as could be applied to it.
The case in its main features is quite characteristic.
There are some mistresses who, when they find their servants in this condition, take steps to see that they are tended in some way.
They cannot be expected to keep them in the house, but they do what can be done to prevent the mother and child suffering.[Pg 157] There are others who simply turn them out and take no further interest in them; and it is the fear of this that leads to concealment.
If they would even act as mediators between the girls and their people much mischief would be prevented.
Hardly ever does such a case as the above occur but what there are letters to the newspapers demanding that the father of the infant should be placed in the dock with the mother.
The mother is not there for begetting a child, but for killing it, and the former act is not yet punishable by law.
The general opinion seems to be that men are continually seducing women, and I am not in a position to say whether it is true or not.
Judging from books, it forms the subject of many stories, but I am here only writing of that small portion of the world which has come under my own observation, and in my experience it is grotesquely untrue.
I have heard the woman’s statement in the great majority of cases of infanticide in Scotland during the last sixteen years, and I can recall few in which she made any complaint against the father of the child, although I sought for it.
In some cases I was told that the father had not been informed of the woman’s condition, although she knew where to find him; and that he had been kept in ignorance because she did not want to marry him.
In the other cases the conception seemed to be the result of intimacy that was temporary and long past.
I am far from suggesting that there are no bad men who lead girls astray; what I say is that in this class of case these are not the girls who appear as criminals.
The fact is that among a certain class of lads and girls there is a degree of looseness of behaviour that is in striking contrast with the officially recognised code of morals.
They take risks with a light heart, and the woman pays; not always because the man[Pg 158] shirks, but because any consequence of their conduct is entailed on her by her sex.
The girl knows this as well as the lad, but neither of them considers consequences at the time.
An acquaintanceship begun innocently enough may insensibly and by degrees become something more, not as the result of consideration, but quite independent of anything in the way of thought.
If consequences were certain it might be different.
It is difficult to apportion blame and it is not very profitable to try; but it is quite certain that the woman leads the man as much as he leads her to misconduct.
Child murder is no necessary consequence of his act, and there is no sense in assuming that he knew the girl’s condition and deserted her, when the fact can easily be ascertained.
It would be a great mistake to suppose that girls who do not preserve their chastity are necessarily bad.
They would quite readily admit that it is wrong to be unchaste, as many an untruthful person will admit it is wrong to lie; but they do not seem to suffer in self-respect, nor greatly in the esteem of others, if they yield themselves to the lad who is their sweetheart for the time.
Their conduct may be suspected; but in the absence of proof, and if decency is observed, their morals are taken for granted.
Every professional man knows that there are very many different standards of conduct in Glasgow.
The doctor cannot shut his eyes to the fact if he would; the lawyer during the time he acts as Agent for the Poor sees and hears enough to convince him that the professed and the working standards of conduct are different; and even among those connected with their Churches clergymen occasionally find some who have to get married as a result of their behaviour.[Pg 159] The girls who misbehave in this way may be reviled as prostitutes, but that is utterly to fail in judging them.
That they are no worse than the men goes without saying; but there cannot be a standard for the woman and another for the man, though in practice it is more frequently the moralists who try to make one—not by their words, but by the effect of their judgment.
The same girl who has given herself to men is sometimes the most bitter in her denunciations of prostitutes; but on the subject of prostitution I do not propose to enter, for any real consideration of it would involve a plainness of speech on which it would be unsafe to venture.
This must be said, however, that the woman who goes astray is treated shamefully by the law, which operates to drive her deeper in the mire and causes reformation to be more difficult for her than for any other kind of offender.
Any proposal to place these poor souls more completely under the domination of officials, medical or police (whether made on the specious pretext of public health or public morals), would intensify the difficulty, and would result, as it would deserve, in increasing the evil it sought to remedy.
It is bad enough that any members of the community should become slaves to the vices of others, but it would be worse to confirm them in their slavery in order to protect those whom they serve.
In proportion to the number of offences committed by women bigamy appears to be more common than it is among the male offenders.
The reason is largely economic, but the method of its operation is dependent on sex.
The woman wants a home, but if she were not a woman that is not the way she would choose to get one.
She could get established, but her sense of propriety will not allow her to accept the position[Pg 160] without the form of marriage, even although she knows the form to be illegal.
She may have ground for a divorce by reason of the desertion of her husband or his misconduct; but the ground for divorce and the ability to obtain one are different matters.
If divorce is to be permitted there does not seem to be any reason why it should be refused to those who cannot afford to go to law to obtain it.
If one of the parties to a marriage gives cause for divorce the need for it will be the greater in proportion to poverty, for people are less able to keep out of each other’s way if they are living together in a small house than would be the case if they had more room; and if they are separated the economic disadvantages are not less.
Yet these are the very people who are least able to obtain relief; their poverty ensures that.
When they go through the form of marriage with some other we pay the cost of their imprisonment.
The money would be better employed in setting them free from the contract which has gone wrong.
Some of them voluntarily give themselves up in the belief that their imprisonment will break the former marriage.
Our judges have become more and more inclined to deal leniently with such cases; reserving their heavy sentences for those which show moral turpitude; and the number of these is small.
To the woman there is something in the form of marriage which enables her to preserve her self-respect, and the “marriage lines” are a testimony to others.
It is a queer condition of affairs, in their view, that allows them to live with a man if they do not go through a ceremony of marriage with him, and which sends them to prison if they do; for they cannot be expected to see that the rights of property may depend on the prohibition of conduct such as theirs.
The universal cure-all—The public and the advertising healer—The essence of all quackery—The quackery of punishment—Rational treatment—Justice not bad temper—Retribution—Our fathers and ourselves—Their methods not necessarily suitable to our time—Capital punishment—The incurable and the incorrigible—Objections to capital punishment apply in degree to all punishment—The “cat”—The executioner and the surgeon—Whipping and its effect—The flogged offender—The act and the intention—Pain and vitality—Unequal effects of punishment—Fines and their burden—Who is punished most?—Punishment and expiation—Punishment and deterrence—Social opinion the real deterrent—Vicious social circles—Respect for the law—Prevention of crime.
SINCE newspapers have become great advertising mediums their readers have had information thrust upon them by picture and story regarding the need to flee from ills to come and seek refuge in the patent pill.
Health is the great thing to attend to, and there is a large number of people engaged in our instruction.
Some will have us see to the equal development of all our muscles, though what we are to do with them when they are developed we may not clearly apprehend.
Others prescribe for us all a proper course of diet, and though the professors differ among themselves as to what is the best food for mankind, they seem to be all agreed that there is a universal food.
If we find their prescriptions do not suit us, that is an evidence of degeneracy on our part which[Pg 162] must be overcome.
It is all very like what has passed itself off as education.
At school, if a boy showed an aptitude for drawing and none for composition, he was taken from the thing he could do and worried into doing the thing he was not fitted for doing, with the result that in many cases children left school able to do a number of things equally badly and few things well.
The attempt to make people ambidextrous is more likely to make them left-handed in both hands.
Health is the greatest of blessings, but the man who is always concerned for his health is not the healthy man; time passes, and he may lose his life while he is preparing to live.
He is encouraged to examine himself, and all the possible ailments which may annoy him are described and their significance exaggerated till he gets nervous.
A specific is found for every ill to which the flesh is heir, and its efficacy is trumpeted till some equally infallible cure replaces it in public estimation.
The saving remedy may be called a quack preparation, and its composition proclaimed and condemned by the regular practitioner, but a sufficient number of purchasers is found to justify the expense of advertising it.
It is sure to benefit somebody, however antecedently improbable that effect may be, and there is certain to be some sufferer who will be grateful enough to testify to its cure.
Some of the testimonials may be spurious, but many of them are quite as genuine as any that the doctors receive.
Dash has suffered from pains in her back for years, and has tried the patience and the prescriptions of every doctor within her reach without obtaining any permanent relief.
She has had to resign herself to a state of chronic invalidism, and is an object of pity to all who know her.
She hears from a friend of the wonderful curative effects of the[Pg 163] Rational Rheumatic Regimen and puts herself under treatment, with the result that her neighbours cannot believe she is the same woman, and she herself feels in better health than she has ever before enjoyed.
Then follows a list of symptoms which is sure to appeal to some sufferer.
The public, knowing all that can be urged against quack medicines, distrusts and purchases them.
Dash is not published for philanthropic but for business reasons, but he thinks that what cured her may help him.
Even those who utterly condemn quack medicines fall quite readily into the error of quackery when they come to discuss social subjects; for the essence of quackery is the belief that what is good for one person must be good for every other.
Diseases are not entities, but conditions that cannot exist apart from the man; and similarly crime cannot exist apart from society.
We may alter conditions in such a way that the tendency to disease or crime will be lessened; but when a person has become diseased we have to know something more about him than the fact that he shows certain symptoms before he can be treated in any rational way and with a prospect of his recovery.
So when he has committed a crime we must know more than that fact before there is much hope of being able to correct him.
There is as much quackery in the practice of making punishment fit crime as in that of making remedies fit diseases.
When a man offends against the law he is taken in hand by the ministers of the law; and they are awakening to a sense of the futility of their treatment of him, but so far not much progress has been made towards a rational method.
There are more institutions[Pg 164] projected and a greater variety of remedies prescribed; but they depend on the nature of the crime charged, rather than on the character and condition of the culprit.
Some day it may be acknowledged that the court that has to determine whether a person is guilty of the offence charged against him is not therefore the court that is able to determine his treatment, but there will first require to be a more general recognition of the fact that before a man can be treated rationally for any physical, mental, moral, or social fault in him, something more must be known about him than that the fault is there.
I do not suggest that rational treatment will invariably be successful; there is nothing absolute in this world, not even our ignorance; but I do assert that we are not entitled to act irrationally in dealing with criminals, and that that is what we generally do at present.
The practice of the courts has changed much more than the law during the last sixteen years, and there is a greater disposition on the part of judges to seek information regarding those who are brought before them, as well as a more marked reluctance to send offenders to prison if there appears to be a probability that they will not repeat their offence.
The old theories of punishment have broken down, and it is now difficult to find any coherent theory behind the practice.
When a crime is committed that shocks the public by its atrocity there are demands made for fierce retribution on the culprit, partly on the plea that he ought to be made to suffer, and partly for the purpose of deterring others from repeating the act.
Incidentally those who are most insistent on the employment of the executioner show that they possess a fair share of the same spirit that educed the act which they condemn.
They are rightly indignant,[Pg 165] but they do not seem to see that justice and bad temper are not the same thing.
Few would defend the application literally of the retributive “eye-for-an-eye” principle.
They know that a man’s eye may not be of as much use to him as that which he has destroyed may have been to his victim.
It may be like taking gold and offering lead in exchange.
Even if the eyes be equal in value it does not in the slightest degree compensate the injured person to know that the person who did him the injury is as blind as he; and as for the community, it is to place two blind men where one was before.
Of course nobody has proposed to deal in this manner with the person who blinds another; but many are quite satisfied to act on the principle, and to apply it by way of killing murderers and flogging those who commit assaults.
The law has prohibited certain actions as below the standard of conduct permitted to the members of the community.
When a man takes life, in order to show him the sacredness of life, it takes his.
It is a lesson to him; and there is this to be said for it, that it prevents him from offending again.
We all know how much we are the superiors of the poor foreigners in our manners and our powers, for in spite of our modesty, our teachers in the Press are always insisting on the fact, and truth compels us to admit it.
Yet these same teachers sometimes confuse us not a little by their methods of defending us when we are charged with doing something which we cannot deny having done.
Some necessary severity in war, or some strong actions on the part of those who in our name teach the native races how to live, may have provoked remark on the part of other nations.
At once we hear that they have done similar things; but if we are better than they, surely we must prove[Pg 166] it by our actions? If we are better than those whom we judge and condemn, why do we treat them as they have treated others?
To hire a man to kill another is a queer way to teach men to respect life.
That our fathers did it is true, and we have taken over the practice from them.
I do not think it probable that our fathers were any greater fools than we are, but their circumstances were different; not to speak of the fact that we have had handed on to us by them an accumulation of experience in civil life which they had not time to absorb.
We may be no better than they were, but they have not failed to contribute to make us better off, and their ways of doing things are not suitable to the altered circumstances in which we find ourselves.
They were more worried by their fighting men than we are, and were always liable to be assailed by some lord or other whose honourable occupation was arms and who was industrious in the pursuit of it.
He or somebody like him professed to protect the worker and ensure him the fruits of his labour—less discount.
The fighting man has always made this profession; but he never protects the worker from the worker; he protects the worker from some other warrior who may be a greater nuisance—or may not.
Now he is under the direction of the law, and is not allowed to make war on his own account.
In the good old days the governor was often busily engaged and had no time to bother with offenders.
The pit or the gallows were for them, unless they could be depended on to refrain from troubling him and pay him for letting them work.
Part of the time he was himself a prisoner in his castle—and a not very sanitary or comfortable prison it was—and at other[Pg 167] times he was acting as warder over some other lord whom he had besieged.
The easiest way to deal with unruly persons was to hang them to a tree and leave them there; they deserved it, and even if they did not, they might do so; in any case they were a good riddance.
Now we are more settled and less summary in our dealings with each other.
We have long ceased to employ the hangman except in cases of murder, and even then the penalty is seldom inflicted in Scotland; for it is repugnant to the feelings of most juries, and they only call killing “murder” when their feelings of indignation get the upper hand.
I am far from saying that no case can now be made out for capital punishment; what I am contending is that it is the outstanding example of the application of the retributory principle; and yet in practice it is usually defended on the ground that the culprit is so bad that he ought to be killed—another ground altogether.
“What could you do with a man who would do that?” is the question addressed to those who assert that the worst use to which you can put a man is to kill him.
Well, is he so bad as all that? I have seen a number of very tough specimens under sentence of death, and have watched the effect on warders of intimate association with them.
They have had to be constantly in the company of the condemned, for although he has to be killed he must be given no opportunity to kill himself; and in almost every case the men had only one opinion after getting closely in touch with the criminal, and that opinion was that, in spite of all the evil in him, he was not such a bad creature after all.
In some cases the opinion of his character was much more favourable; but in all cases the opinions were the result of seeing the man when he was under the sentence of the law.
That is as true[Pg 168] an observation as that the sentence was the result of conduct when he was running wild.
It was the same man who had done the wicked act who impressed men favourably, though their official bias was against him; and he could not have done so if the qualities had not been in him.
There may be men among us who are so utterly bad that all the State can do with them is to kill them in order to secure the safety of others, but I have not seen them.
There are men so riddled with disease that no cure for them can be held out, and the disease may be of such a character that it is likely to infect or affect injuriously those who attend them, but doctors are not permitted to kill them.
In these cases as strong an argument could be adduced in favour of capital punishment as in the case of criminals; and there are those who advocate the lethal chamber for certain classes of the diseased and “unfit.” In every case the advocates of the proposal should be the first to go there, for their very advocacy shows that they are themselves unfit to take a sufficiently wide view of the good of the State.
We know too little of the possibilities of life to be justified in condemning anyone to death.
The medical man speaks of some diseases as being incurable; but so far from meaning what he says literally, his whole life is spent in seeking for cures.
Knowledge widens slowly, and false lights are hailed as true, but in spite of all set-backs there is progress; and to-day the diseased conditions that our fathers could not deal with may be relieved and in many cases cured.
What the doctor really means is that there are many diseases for which he has not yet found the appropriate remedy; and when we speak of men as being incorrigible we are only entitled to use the word in the same limited[Pg 169] way, meaning that we have so far not been able to correct them.
The infliction of the death penalty has no good effect on those engaged in it.
I have never seen anyone who had anything to do with it that was not the worse for it.
As for the doctor, who must be in attendance, it is an outrage on all his professional, as well as his personal feelings.
The physician is taught that it is his duty to save life, apart altogether from its personal value.
When he is called in to a patient it is no affair of his whether the sick person is a saint or a sinner; it is his duty to do his best for the patient irrespective of any question of character, and to risk infection as readily for the sake of the wicked as for the sake of the good.
At the behest of the law he has to take a part in the killing of a man whom he has been instructed to attend in order that at the proper time he may be led to death in a state of good health.
I do not say that there are not men who may seem so debased and vile that any reformation would appear to be only remotely possible; but while they are to be blamed for their wickedness, we are not free from blame for permitting them to grow into such a state before taking them in hand.
In no case that I have seen was such interference impossible had our system been one that lent itself to the prevention of crime and the reformation of the criminal; but because it was easier and more profitable for them to do ill than to do well, they went the wrong road with disastrous results to others as well as to themselves.
Blame them by all means; but let us be just, and having settled how much they are to blame—not a very profitable task—let us set about to find how far we are to blame; having punished them, what about punishing ourselves? Our punishment is fixed by laws that no[Pg 170] Parliament can alter; our own neglect of the wrongdoer ensures it.
The objections to capital punishment apply to all punishment up to a point, for if it is wrong to slay a man it is also wrong to maim him; and in so far as our conduct towards him makes him a less efficient member of the community it does maim him.
There are many who are so indignant with the law-breaker that they have no patience with anybody who has doubts as to whether our way of dealing with him is all that could be desired.
They object to his being pampered—whatever that means—and call everybody a sentimentalist who is not for “vigorous means of repression.” There is a sentiment of brutality that is quite as dangerous as any sentiment of pity, and a great deal more harmful; but pity for the criminal need have very little part in consideration for his reform.
He may be, and often is, far from being an estimable or attractive person, and the last thing he needs is pity.
A man may be a good physician or surgeon without being given to anything approaching sentiment that is maudlin; but whether he is full of pity or not he must be sympathetic—that is to say, he must be able to appreciate the standpoint of those with whom he is dealing.
So must the man who would deal with offenders; if he fails in that he fails in everything.
It may be all very well to describe some of them as brutes and to say they should be treated as brutes, but it does not help forward the matter of treatment in the slightest degree; for even brutes cannot all be treated alike, and if a man is treated as a brute it is not likely to result in making him behave like a man.
The cat is a specific for the “brutes” that have not[Pg 171] qualified for the “rope.” The argument seems to be that because a man has committed a brutal crime therefore he is a brute; as he has inflicted serious bodily injury on a fellow-citizen it is proper that someone should be employed to inflict serious bodily injury on him.
But will the man whom you employ to do this laudable work not be a brute also? Does your official imprimatur remove the brutality of his act? If not, one result would seem to be that at the end you have two brutes among you instead of one.
There has never been any pretence that the executioner’s occupation is not a degrading one; never in all this country for very many years, at any rate.
He is not looked down upon because by his office he inflicts pain.
The surgeon in the course of his work inflicts pain, but nobody considers him any the less worthy on that account.
A hand might be cut off by either of them in the discharge of his duty; but though the result may be the same to the owner of the hand, the object has been different.
The surgeon has amputated the hand to save the man’s life; the executioner has cut it off to maim the man.
There can be no objection to the infliction of pain on a criminal more than on others if it is incident on a course of treatment which there is good reason to believe will result in his reform; but there is no such reason for belief in the efficacy of flogging.
I do not say that nobody has been the better for a whipping.
There are many men who are ordinarily as modest as those of our race usually are, and who say that they were well whipped in their boyhood with great benefit.
It might be unsafe to suggest that the argument is not so convincing as it may seem to those who advance it.
Sometimes there is a temptation to think that the treatment, if it were really so[Pg 172] efficacious in making them virtuous, might with profit have been continued; but there can be no doubt they are firmly convinced that without the thrashings they received they would have been worse than they are.
This hardly touches the point, for it is one thing to be whipped by an official who has no interest in the person whipped, and another thing altogether to be chastised by a parent or guardian, or even at his instance.
The effect on the integuments may be the same in both cases, but there is a psychological effect which is different.
Children know that wrongdoing on their part is sometimes the occasion and the excuse for an exhibition of temper on the part of their parents; and they take their punishment with the best grace they can and keep out of the way next time they misbehave.
A whipping in cold blood they do not take in the same spirit; and they are right.
The great objection to any arbitrary punishment is that it may do far more harm than good.
Suppose a child is disobedient and obstinate, and the father proceeds to whip it into obedience.
If he succeeds the child may, through fear, avoid such conduct in the future; but if the child persists in his obstinacy in spite of the whipping, and gets into that dumb dour state in which he is likely to go off in a fit if the whipping is persisted in, the shoe is on the other foot.
The father has to desist through fear, the child having met force with passive resistance is the master, and he retains the impression of his parent’s brutality and impotence.
It is never wise in the case of children, or of men, to embark on a course of treatment that you cannot continue till your object is gained.
There may have been some reason in flogging men with the object of ruling them by fear, but the policy[Pg 173] would depend on the thoroughness with which it was carried out for what success it could obtain.
There would always be the risk that the penalty would make men more ferocious if it were the probable result of their misconduct, for if fear may prevent people from doing the ill they desire, it will also cause them to seek safety by attempting to destroy the evidence of their wrongdoing.
Make death the penalty for robbery, and a direct inducement is offered to the robber to kill his victim and prevent him from telling tales.
Flog men for breaches of the law, and if they fear the pain they will the more readily become reckless, on the principle of its being as well to be hanged for a sheep as a lamb.
That there is a strong feeling on the part of the public against flogging is undeniable, and it is not so much the result of reasoning as of sentiment.
The mass of men not only shrink from suffering pain, but they shrink from the suffering of others, and they are less inclined than they once were to believe in its efficacy as a remedial agent.
The man who in a former day would have been flogged and set to work is now sent to hospital if the whip has scored his flesh.
A surgeon stands by to see that his vitality is not lowered beyond a certain point in the execution of the sentence; it is a nice occupation for him to superintend the impairment of a man’s health, but as a compensation the rogue may become a patient and the doctor have the privilege of healing any wounds made under his supervision.
The patient is now in a position to do any mischief he chooses; you have done your utmost with him and are not permitted to kill him.
If as rigid an enquiry were made into the causes of men’s wrongdoing as is made into the question of their personal[Pg 174] guilt there would be less occasion for punishment as we have had it.
Boys are still whipped for some offences and in certain cases.
To say that it is better to whip a boy than to send him to prison, is only to admit that whipping is the less serious of the two methods of injuring him; and in some cases the boys are whipped for no other reason.
There is a well-founded reluctance to sentence them to detention in any existing institution, combined with a belief in the necessity of inflicting some penalty on them for their misdeeds.
The world is so constituted that we are all the children of our acts; payment may be delayed, but it must be made sometime if every deed carries its penalty with it; but such a belief is quite consistent with scepticism as to the necessity for the legal penalties on which so many place importance.
Indeed, that they also carry their consequences is seen of all men, and there is no manner of doubt that those on whom they fall are made worse citizens by them.
That might be a small matter if their degeneration did not injuriously affect the community of which they are unworthy members, but in hurting them we are hurting ourselves.
It is not so much what we do as the spirit in which it is done that causes the mischief.
A person who is sick and in bed may be as much a prisoner as a man in a cell.
His doctor may prevent him from seeing visitors and may sentence him to a period of something very like solitary confinement, but he knows that this is done with no intention of hurting him, but because it is necessary in the interest of his health, or that of others.
The prisoner has no such opinion as to the purpose of his imprisonment, and neither have those who carry it out.
He may be the better for it, though[Pg 175] that is exceptional, but discomfort and pain is an essential part of whatever cure there is.
I remember when a student a worthy old practitioner who made a point of choosing the most painful remedies for persons suffering from certain diseases, as he held the opinion that they ought to be made to suffer for their misconduct.
He certainly made them suffer, but as they were not compelled to attend him they chose others who cured them more rapidly and with less pain.
It is now generally recognised that pain, or anything that lowers vitality, operates injuriously and retards the recovery of patients; and every means is taken to prevent suffering, not because it makes the patient feel bad, but because it causes him to be bad.
Suppose a surgeon said to a man who appeared before him with a scalp wound received through falling on the kerb while under the influence of drink, “You have been foolish and wicked, since you have made yourself intoxicated and lost control of your senses.
Your head is wounded, and it is only a chance that you have not been killed.
You have disgraced yourself in the eyes of those among your friends who have any sense of respectability, and you have run the risk of losing your employment as the result of your intemperance.
An example must be made of you in order to deter others from following the same pernicious course.
You have forfeited the right to consideration, but, though you must be made to remember that such conduct as yours cannot be lightly passed over, I shall deal with you as leniently as possible for the sake of your wife and family.
You will receive an application of germs to your wound which will produce erysipelas, after which I shall proceed to deal with your cure.” The doctor[Pg 176] who tried this method would be sent to a lunatic asylum; but it is precisely what is done in our courts.
The prisoner is told he is bad—and he is; then he is sent—to be made better? Not at all.
Whatever may be said against the prisons, it cannot be shown that they ever were designed to reform those sent to them, and if they fail to do so they do not therefore fail in the purpose for which they were built, which is to detain and punish criminals.
The extent to which they do punish varies greatly according to the antecedents of the person who is sent to them.
On the clerk and the labourer who have received the same sentence its physical effect may differ very much.
If both are put to do labouring work, as they very well may be, at the end of the day the man who is accustomed to it will be less hurt and fatigued than the man who has been used to other employment.
If the object is to make them all alike uncomfortable the clerk should be set to dig a trench and the labourer to write, and at the end of the day the one would be stained with ink and the hands of the other would be stinging or blistered.
As it is the work done by the labourer is child’s play to him, but it is toilsome to the man whose occupation is sedentary; to the public it is not of much utility in any case.
A common method of punishing offenders is to impose fines upon them, so that if a man has money he may commit any of a large number of offences without any risk of imprisonment.
It may even be profitable for him to do so, for the fines for doing some illegal acts by which money can be made are in some cases less than the profits to be made by transgressing the law.
The principle of restitution is one that can be readily understood and approved, but fines are not an attempt[Pg 177] to apply such a principle.
They go, not to any person who may have been injured, but to the local exchequer for the most part.
This is a vicious arrangement, for it is an incitement to the local authorities to make as much as they can off the offenders in their district; and whether they are ever moved by it or not, it is not proper that they should have any interest in filling their coffers by such means.
Fines fall very unequally as a burden on those subjected to them.
The amount inflicted, though small, may be out of all proportion to the offender’s means; half-a-crown is not much, but it is a great deal to the man who has not got it.
Before the same court you may have two men charged with similar offences.
One is a motorist who has exceeded the speed limit; the other is a driver of a light van who in trying to catch a train has been reckless in his driving.
The motorist may be fined in five times the amount inflicted on the vanman, but to the one the sum only represents a small inroad on his means, while to the other it represents something like a week’s wages.
There is not one law for the rich and another for the poor; if there were they might not be so unequally treated.
There is the same law for both; but in its effect it favours the rich at the expense of the poor, and that is not to the ultimate advantage of the community.
The fine is an alternative to imprisonment, and in practice it is a peculiarly striking example of our whole system of punishment.
The magistrate on behalf of the public says to the offender, in effect, “You have transgressed the laws of the state in which you live and must therefore be punished.
I do not wish to be too hard on you, but you must either pay us five shillings or we shall keep you for three days.” Now as people cannot be kept in prison without cost being[Pg 178] thereby incurred, the effect of the sentence is that if the offender does not pay to the police five shillings on his own account the taxpayer pays the prison five shillings.
The culprit is injured by being sent to prison; but the public is also injured by having to pay.
It is remarkably like the operation known as cutting off the nose to spite the face.
This is indeed the effect of most of our punishments; they injure others besides the criminal, and there is room for grave doubt as to whether they benefit anybody.
Once the punishment has been undergone, the offender is supposed to have expiated his offence; but as there is no positive expiation for past wrongdoing, except it may be future welldoing, this is a fiction.
It is not a wise thing to teach the ignorant that they can pay for any harm they do; least of all to teach them that they atone by imprisonment for injuries inflicted on others.
It is no compensation to a man who has been hurt to know that his assailant is being lodged and fed at his expense, and that some day he will come out no better than when he went into his place of retreat.
When a man is disabled by injuries he has received his family is likely to suffer, and if he be a working man they may be in peril of becoming destitute.
His assailant is shut up, and his family too may suffer in a similar way and to an equal degree.
The law will see that the offender is taken care of, but the injured person and the families of both the parties are left to struggle as best they may.
What harm have they done? They are neglected, and may suffer hunger unless they also do harm, while the offender is “expiating” his offence at the public expense.
In so far as punishment is retributive it is foolish and indefensible, harming not only those on whom[Pg 179] it is inflicted, but those who inflict it.
If as individuals we are not justified in fostering a spirit of revenge, we are as little entitled to encourage such a spirit in our corporate capacity.
Their actions show that some men are capable of doing very wicked things, and that is a very good reason for interfering with them; but it is no reason for interfering in such a way that we are all burdened by it, while there is no reasonable expectation that they are being brought to a better frame of mind.
Until late in the last century the Crown Prosecutor craved for punishment on those who had committed indictable offences “in order to deter others from committing the like offence in all time coming.” That form has been dropped, but the theory is still widely held that punishment deters others than those convicted.
The prison returns show that there is no reason for claiming that it deters many of those who have been punished from repeating their offensive conduct.
The “others” in some numbers are always recruiting the ranks of those who habitually transgress, but the great majority of our fellow-citizens keep out of prison.
Are we to believe that this is because the punishment of the prisoners sent there has deterred them from committing offences? It may be the reason; but it cannot be proved even if it is.
For my own part, I have never seen any cause to believe that my acquaintances and friends refrain from beating their wives and from taking what is not their own because if they did these things they might be sent to jail; and I have observed that those who theorise most about the conduct of others and its causes, are frequently quite unable to advance any evidence from their own observations and experience that would support their theories.
[Pg 180]There can be no doubt that the dignified jurists who adopt Mansfield’s view (that a man should be hanged not because he had stolen a horse, but in order that others might not steal horses) would resent the suggestion that they themselves are honest simply from the fear of the law, and it would show less conceit of themselves and more knowledge of their neighbours if they assumed that the mass of their fellow-citizens are no worse than they.
In my day at school some boys were unmercifully whacked, when the master got into a temper as a result of their iniquity.
The theory was that this discouraged others from committing the same offences; but as boys are as often punished for the stupidity of themselves or the teacher as for any wilful misconduct on their part, the theory was not in accord with the practice.
When some unfortunate culprit was called up, the feelings of the rest of us were of a mixed nature.
Partly we were sorry for him, but the degree was dependent on our personal regard for him; partly there was a feeling of contempt for him in so far as he was imprudent enough to let himself be caught; partly there was some curiosity as to how he would demean himself; and mainly there was thankfulness that we were not in his shoes.
The punishment did not deter any of us from doing the same thing; but it did make us more careful in the doing of it, and it gave some a training in duplicity that appears to have been of use to them in their business careers.
In so far as the teacher was considered to be a tyrant it was rather a feather in a boy’s cap than otherwise if he could disobey, especially if he escaped.
Even if he were caught it was not considered a disgrace, and if he were severely punished the clumsiness he had shown in playing his pranks was overlooked[Pg 181] and he was treated with the respect due to a martyr.
It was a small matter to break the master’s rules, though nobody cared to be caught; but it was a serious thing for a boy to outrage the standard of conduct which was adopted by his neighbours.
The teacher who knew this could command obedience so long as he worked on the knowledge; and it is the same with men as with boys.
They react most powerfully to the opinion of the circle in which they move; if it were not so they would soon cease to be members of it.
Who sets the standard it is usually impossible to say; but each influences the other, although one personality may be more dominant than any other.
He is the bad one when there is a bad one; not because he is worse morally than others, but because he is usually more daring and active; and as the commandments by which boys are ruled are mainly negative, his positive personality brings him into conflict with them and leads others after him.
But there are social circles in our midst where men are placed in the same relation to the law as boys were at school.
They are told to respect it, and they know they must obey it at their peril; but it appears to them as a series of senseless and unjust prohibitions which interferes with their comfort and does not offer them any protection against their enemies.
They do not need policemen to protect their property, for they have none to protect; and they feel quite able to look after their personal safety.
What they would appreciate would be protection from what they consider the exactions of the factor and the tax-collector, and there are no police of that sort yet.
They have no respect for the law any more than I have respect for a steam-engine, though I keep out of its way.
If the law is something that protects other people from them, but[Pg 182] does not protect them from other people, they cannot be expected to hold it in much respect; they may look on it as their enemy.
Many do not go so far, though they distrust it and its ministers; but there are coteries, groups, who do regard the law as something that it is praiseworthy to break.
I am not now referring to a man who makes a living by theft, but to the young people who are brought up in certain slum districts and who there contract inverted ideas of morality.
Granted the existence of such circles, it is easy to see how defiance of the law may get a young man the admiration of his fellows; and as there are parts of the city where homage is rendered to him who has most frequently and cleverly outraged the law by stealing, or by tricking its representatives—where so far from honesty being esteemed a virtue it is sneered at; where chastity is at a discount, and the thief, rake, and bully is the ideal character—there is no reason for any wonder that in the face of punishments there is no lack of offenders.
These people see no reason to respect our rules of conduct.
Our punishments may exercise a deterrent effect on them to the extent of causing them to modify their methods of operation, but the bogey we fix up for their warning will not make them virtuous or cause them to alter the standards they have set up.
Punishment does not deter the great mass of our fellow-citizens from committing crimes.
They are law-abiding because they have no inclination to break the law and no inducement to do so.
Let it press on them and we may hear another story.
I am old enough to remember when in 1886 it was proposed to give Home Rule to Ireland; we had then professors and eminent citizens threatening to take up arms rather than allow the proposal to be carried.
They were[Pg 183] genuinely alarmed for the safety of their friends, and their respect for the law took a back seat for the time.
It is an easy matter for many of us to stand by the laws, for we have not felt their pinch.
That may be a reason why there is always such a difficulty in changing them, and why almost any change is supported by the poorer classes.
Certain it is that even among the honest and welldoing poor there is a suspicion of the law and a reluctance to have anything to do with it.
Those who are definitely at war with it and those who may be tempted to join them, are the only persons whom we may reasonably hope to deter from the commission of certain offences by our arbitrary punishment of those whom we catch; and even in their case there is no ground for the belief that the deterrent effect is such as to cause them to mend their way of living, but only to modify their methods.
The real deterrent is social opinion, and when one of them comes out of jail it is quite evident that his imprisonment has not caused him to sink to the smallest extent in the estimation of those whose good opinion he values.
Serious crime has steadily declined in Glasgow as the nests of the criminals have been torn down.
They are much less potent for evil when separated from each other than when herded together; but now and then there is a recrudescence of brutality and violence followed by demands for more severe treatment of those who are captured.
In France, lately, the guillotine has been brought forth again with the object of frightening the bandits.
I know nothing about conditions there; but it is quite evident that here we might have such a demand resulting from an outbreak of crime, caused not by leniency of treatment of prisoners, not caused indeed by the way in which any part of our penal system acts, but due to the[Pg 184] impunity with which the sharpers and criminals in our midst are allowed to practise.
So long as there is no provision whereby a man can obtain opportunity for honest work with a guarantee that the fruits of his labour will not be taken from him, there will be many unemployed.
Most of them are quite well-disposed persons, but some of them are not.
We cannot deal properly with the shirkers and sharpers till we have separated off the merely unfortunate.
When we have seen that men have opportunity to support themselves we shall be fairly entitled to question the person who has no visible honest means of subsistence as to how he is obtaining his living; and, failing satisfaction, to deal with him.
Meantime they are mixed up with the honest and law-abiding but unfortunate citizens, to the aggravation of the misery that honesty and poverty combined have brought on them.
Let them combine and act together and there is no saying how far they may go; not because our prisons are too comfortable; not because of anything that does or does not take place there; but because our cities are not properly managed; because we have permitted the aggregation of people under conditions that have been favourable to the growth of an anti-social sentiment; because we have bred the monster that strikes fear into us.
The treatment of the criminal may be wise, or it may be as foolish as I think it; but you might as well blame the method of treating a typhus case in hospital for the spread of that disease in an insanitary area, as blame the leniency of the courts for any outbreak of crime you may have in the areas which are known to be infested with criminals.
All the elements are there for such an outbreak, and if it occurs it will be[Pg 185] because we have permitted them to combine.
How far we are justified in making one person the scapegoat for the sins of another, even if we could do it, is a matter for discussion by those who are concerned with such problems.
For my own part, I do not think it fair to make an example of anybody, as it is called, and I do not believe that it serves any good purpose that could not be better attained by more rational means.
The police and their duties—Divided control—Need for knowledge of local peculiarities—The fear of “corruption”—The police cell—Cleanliness and discomfort—Insufficient provision of diet, etc.—The casualty surgeon—The police court—The untrained magistrate—The assessor—Pleas of “guilty”—Case—Apathy of the public—Agents for the Poor—The prison van—The sheriff court—The procurator-fiscal—Procedure in the higher courts—The Scottish jury.
TO the majority of people the living representative of the law is the policeman.
It is his duty to protect the citizens from evil-doers, and to arrest offenders.
He is the subject of a good deal of chaff, but his position is generally respected; and although men get into the force who by temper and experience are quite unsuited for their work, the great majority discharge the duties laid upon them in a manner that is surprisingly satisfactory, when the demands made upon them are taken into account.
They are supposed to have a knowledge of the law, and for practical purposes they must know something of medicine in order that they may give first aid to the injured; they are expected to be able to answer questions of an exceedingly miscellaneous nature when asked by the passing stranger; and they require to be always cool and clear-headed, to be ready for any emergency, and to have a temper that nothing can[Pg 190] ruffle.
If they have enough of these desirable qualifications to satisfy the authorities they may receive a salary for their services rather better than that given to the unskilled labourer.
That efforts are made to obtain good men for the post is undeniable.
That these efforts are always so enlightened or so successful as they might be is not so certain.
In Glasgow, for instance, a standard of height is set up which excludes the vast majority of Glasgow-bred men from this occupation.
In some parts of the country men go to flesh and bone, and they are big-framed and brawny; but this is not the case in the town.
Yet a man’s height offers no presumption of his fitness for any position involving the exercise of judgment.
excludes all these and limits the choice of candidates very much.
It is not the best men to act as guardians to the public peace that are sought, but the best men amongst those of a certain height; and this is bound to lower the standard of efficiency.
Indeed, the higher the standard of height the lower the standard of efficiency will tend to become, because of the limitation of choice implied.
The police force is a civil force and ought to be entirely under the control of the citizens through their representatives, but this civil force is not formed on any conception of civic needs.
It is organised on a military model, and subject to inspection by a military man on whose reports to the Secretary of State its efficiency is decided.
Nobody seems to think of asking what such an inspector knows of the needs of the district whose police he inspects.
His training enables him to tell when a man carries himself well and turns out his toes nicely, and the ability of the police to do[Pg 191] so is aided by their going to inspection in new uniforms; so that the inspector sees a number of men in new clothes, and decides by their bearing their fitness to act as policemen.
This condition of things enables a man to earn a salary who might otherwise be unemployed, and if it stopped there the absurdity might be worth the money; but when a police force is to be judged and their grants to be graduated, not according to their knowledge of the work, but according to the ignorance of their inspectors, there is likely to be trouble.
If the police require to pay more attention to the inspector who can stop their grant than to representatives of the citizens in whose service they are supposed to act, it is a bad thing for the police and for the citizens.
Every district has its own peculiarities, not observed by those who live there because of custom, but noticed by strangers and sometimes disapproved by them.
It is an advantage, therefore, that those set in positions of authority should be acquainted with the customs and manners of the people among whom they live.
A policeman will discharge his duties with more comfort to himself, more credit to the force, and greater benefit to the community if he knows those in the district in which his duties lie.
Unless he is in touch with the law-abiding elements therein, unless he knows them and has their confidence and support, in many cases he will not be in a position to distinguish between conduct that is harmless and conduct that is criminal.
For instance, it is well known that professional thieves depend largely on their coolness and daring for their success.
If “thief” were written all over them they would starve, and they only earn their living because, to those who are personally unacquainted with them, they are not distinguishable from honest men.
The[Pg 192] policeman knows this; and if he sees a person coming out of business premises long after business hours, he quite naturally questions that person by look or by word.
If he does not know whether the person has a right to be there he may make a fool of himself, either by arresting a man who has had legitimate business on the premises or by letting a thief get away.
He is on the horns of a dilemma in which he should not be placed.
Again, supposing complaints have been made about lads loitering around certain closes or corners, and the policeman has been instructed to have this stopped.
If he knows the inhabitants of his beat he is able to discriminate between those who have a certain right to be about the place and those against whom the complaint is directed.
If he does not know them he may reprimand or arrest the wrong people altogether, causing trouble for himself and widespread irritation that need never have been aroused.
Those who have been affronted or injured do not take his difficulties into account; and it may be that those who are responsible for placing him in what is, after all, a false position, have not sufficiently considered the evil results caused thereby.
The military habit of assuming that every man is like every other man, and shifting people about like so many dolls, has its disadvantages in civil life.
It does make a difference whether the man set to do a certain duty is acquainted with the conditions in which he is placed or is ignorant of them.
Even at the door of a court not only discretion but knowledge is necessary on the part of the door-keeper, and from neglect to recognise this simple fact a Sheriff has been stopped at the door of a High Court; a Procurator-Fiscal after thirty years’ service in the court has been[Pg 193] refused admission; and the medical officer in attendance has had to demand to see a superintendent before he could get in.
If such things are possible in cases like these, it is quite clear a good deal of trouble and annoyance, and possibly a good deal of injustice, may result in quarters which cannot be said to be influential.
It has been said that it is advisable to move men about from one district and from one duty to another in order to prevent their possible corruption; but the men are neither so stupid nor so bad as this reason would imply.
The person who is corrupt will carry his corrupt tendencies with him over a wider area and be quite as dangerous there; for the less he is known the more readily will his personal defects escape supervision and criticism on the part of those among whom he works; and it is better that he should be discovered and dismissed than that the great mass of policemen, who are neither stupid nor corrupt, but who are honestly seeking to discharge their duty in such a manner as to gain them the goodwill of their fellow-citizens, should have their work rendered unnecessarily arduous and difficult.
Too much is expected of them considering the opportunities they are allowed, and their faults are due more to the system by which they are ruled than to any personal defects on the part of the men.
Anything that will bring that system more intimately in touch with the needs of the community and more sympathetically in contact with the difficulties of the poorer classes will help towards the efficiency and also the comfort of the force.
When a person is arrested on any criminal charge he is first taken to the local police station, where the charge is entered.
He is searched and placed in a cell, and if there is anything special in the charge against[Pg 194] him, or in his appearance and behaviour, his treatment may be modified accordingly.
In the great majority of cases the person arrested is only a petty offender at most.
If he has money sufficient, he may hand it over as bail and be released with a notice that if he does not appear at a time and place specified his money will be forfeited and he may again be taken into custody.
If he or his friends cannot leave a pledge for his appearance he makes acquaintance with the routine of administration.
He becomes the tenant of a cell where he remains till the sitting of the court next morning.
If the cell accommodation is fully taken up he may have company; and while every effort is made to prevent old offenders being placed in the same cell with those who are in for the first time, the best that can be done is bad.
Although prisoners are presumed to be innocent till they are found guilty, they are in many respects worse treated while waiting to be sent to prison than after they arrive there.
This is not the fault of the police so much as that of the authorities who are responsible for the accommodation or the want of it.
A drunk man may be a very helpless or a very intractable person, and little can be done for him till he is sober.
His condition is such that it is quite clearly not the best practice to put him in a cell and leave him there.
It is no uncommon thing to find that the drunkenness has masked some more serious condition; but even although there should be nothing behind his intoxication, the man is more liable to contract illness than a sober person.
In less enlightened countries than ours such prisoners are not left alone, but are kept warm and placed under observation till they are sober.
Drunk or sober the prisoner is in an uncomfortable position.
[Pg 195]The police have difficulties to contend with that are not present in the prisons.
The prisoners they arrest are not appreciably more dirty than when they arrive at the prison, but in the police cells there are not the same facilities for making and keeping things clean.
There is no supply of free labour and not a generous provision of paid cleaners, and the cells in some cases seem to be constructed more with a view to saving the expense of cleaning than to providing for the reasonable custody of prisoners.
Wooden floors are less easily cleaned than asphalt or cement, and both in the prisons and the police cells this seems to determine their construction.
It is a piece of senseless cruelty in a climate such as ours, as anyone can easily find out for himself if he cares to try.
In such a place even in warm weather it is difficult to keep the feet warm, and cold feet do not improve a man’s temper.
The newer cells are lined with glazed brick in deference to some sanitary notions.
It is a great pity that the apostles of sanitation cannot be compelled to live in the places they design.
No doubt the glazed walls are more easily cleaned than whitewashed brick would be, but they strike a chill into the occupants of the place, and moisture condenses on them in a way that it does not elsewhere.
Cleanliness let us have by all reasonable means, but to be clean it is not necessary to be uncomfortable; and such methods are enough to disgust with cleanliness those who have to submit to their results.
Another objectionable feature of the cell is the presence of a water-closet in it.
Surely the sanitary expert has been napping when this was arranged; but here again the matter seems to be one of expense.
The reasonable way would be to escort prisoners to a place when necessary, but that would mean the provision of a proper staff[Pg 196] of warders.
The cell is otherwise unfurnished save for a raised slab of wood which takes the place of a bed.
It is a barbarous provision for the man who is presumed to be innocent.
He may have food sent in or he may have money to purchase it.
If not, he will have to get along on bread and water, not having been proved guilty.
In the morning he will be brought before the court, and if he asks for it he may have water to wash himself before appearing there.
Cleanliness is not enforced, though it may be encouraged; but judging by their appearance when admitted to prison, not many have sought the water-basin during their stay in the police cell.
By the Summary Jurisdiction Act, 1908, it was provided that persons should not be kept in police cells for more than one night, and all persons remanded were sent to prison, to their distinct advantage; for there the staff and conditions are arranged for the custody of prisoners, and they are free for the time being from the noises incidental to the arrest and confinement of drunken persons, while they have a better chance of having their needs attended to.
This procedure entailed more work on the officials, a difficulty that could easily have been overcome by a small increase in the staff.
It meant not more trouble than is necessitated in the case of persons remitted to higher courts, and if the interests of the prisoners who are presumed to be innocent had been considered the Act would have remained in force; but their convenience was not represented so powerfully as that of the officials, and reversion to the old, bad plan of retaining prisoners in the custody of the police has taken place.
They may be kept in the police cells for forty-eight hours.
[Pg 197]Some of those who are arrested may be suffering from injuries or disease.
When he is asked to do so, it is his duty to call and see prisoners who complain or who are obviously ill.
His pay is small; and from it, until lately, he had to provide any dressings and medicines that were required.
It is not part of his duty to see every prisoner before the court begins.
Occasionally people are sent to prison who should never have been brought before the courts at all.
Both police and surgeon are placed in a very difficult position by the system.
The police may err in their judgment as to the condition of a prisoner and may fail to direct the attention of the medical man to him.
On the other hand, if they call in the surgeon too frequently to see persons who are not in need of his services he may reasonably complain, and dissensions may arise on this account which will make the working of the system irritating to all parties.
In order to their comfort, surgeon and police have to make allowances for each other and to stand by one another in a way that is not likely to make for such efficiency of service to the public on the part of either as is desirable.
When some extraordinary case attracts attention blame is lavishly showered upon the police; and it is generally undeserved, at least in the form it takes.
They are not to blame because of their failure to do things for which they are unfitted.
They may be to blame for not protesting against duties being thrust upon them which should be performed by others.
It is misdirected economy to underpay medical men, and until this is recognised accidents may be looked for and incidents will occur to shock the public because of the injury which some person has inadvertently sustained.
[Pg 198]In the Court the Burgh Procurator-Fiscal may prosecute, or his depute may act for him.
In Glasgow with all its police courts there is only one trained lawyer who prosecutes.
The great mass of the charges are conducted by his deputes, who are invariably police officers.
The only witnesses in many cases are constables and the prosecutor is one of their superior officers.
It is a state of affairs that does not impress an outsider by its wisdom, and it is not regarded by those who come within its scope as being fair.
On the bench, in the great majority of cases, there is an untrained judge.
In Glasgow there is only one stipendiary magistrate, who is a trained lawyer.
The others are magistrates of the city, who have to discharge a multitude of duties, among which is that of sitting in judgment on their fellow-citizens.
They have been elected to the Town Council to serve their constituents as members of that body, and in due course they are made Bailies.
Nobody pretends that they are thereby endowed with a knowledge of the law, experience in weighing evidence, or the judicial mind; but they are invested with judicial powers, and in certain cases can send men to prison for twelve months.
They are usually men of excellent character and intentions, but unfortunately both of these qualities may exist with utter incompetence from a judicial standpoint.
The draper would not admit that a grocer could exchange businesses with him and the concern go on as well as ever.
Each man knows that to learn his own trade requires time, to speak of nothing else; but they appear to believe that all that is required to enable them to execute what in law stands for justice is the possession of a chain of office.
Were there any foundation in fact for such an idea many[Pg 199] weary years of study would be saved; for it is easier to get a chain than a licence to practise.
That they are usually quite satisfied of their own fitness for the work goes without saying; and it would be a piece of vanity as harmless as it is foolish if the liberty of so many were not placed in jeopardy by it.
It has been urged as an argument against the appointment of trained lawyers that there were fewer appeals from the decisions of the Bailies than from those of the professional man.
This is meant as a testimony to their superior fitness, presumably; for the only relevant inference from the statement is that the Bailie is better qualified to act as a judge than the man who has had a training in the work.
It is a startling testimony to the superiority of inspiration to reason.
There are no testimonials from those who had appeared before the courts either as prisoners or agents, however; and the plea is not convincing.
That it should ever have been made is a striking commentary on the fitness of those who made it; or on their modesty.
Appeals from police-court decisions can only be made on a case stated by the magistrate whose judgment is appealed against.
Trained men are not free from liability to error, and they recognise the fact.
If a case is stated in such a way that the issue is obscured there is no use in attempting an appeal; so that freedom from appeals may as readily be a testimony to the inefficiency of a judge as to his efficiency.
It may afford a presumption that he is not only unfit to try a case, but not to be trusted in stating one.
To suggest that it affords evidence of the superior ability of the draper and the grocer to the lawyer in law matters, is to presume too much on the credulity of the public.
If they are really so splendidly endowed it is surprising that they should[Pg 200] not place their services at the disposal of one another when a question of trade causes dispute.
In that they might be expected to have knowledge at least; but though Bailies have power to send men to prison they are not empowered to try civil causes involving the property of their fellow-citizens.
That is to say, they have power over the lives, but not over the property of the lieges.
This is surely a grave injustice; either to them or to the prisoners.
In every court where a bailie presides he is aided and advised by an assessor, whose duty it is to keep him within the law.
The prisoner is there because he is charged with breaking the law; the bailie is there to try him on the charge; and behind him is a legal gentleman to see that the judge does not himself break the law in the process! He may either take the advice of the assessor or disregard it, but he is the responsible magistrate.
If he follows the assessor’s advice, that official is in the exercise of power without responsibility, which is not a position in which anybody should be placed; if he follows the inner light, the “safeguard” which the assessor is supposed to be is useless.
It is looked upon by many as a very small affair, this whole matter of the Police Court, but it is really a very large affair and a very important one.
Police Courts are those where most offenders appear for the first time, and from them they are first sent to prison.
As the first step counts for so much, it is of the utmost importance that those who come before these Courts should have their cases thoroughly considered.
This cannot be done if the proceedings are hurried, and it is notorious that Bailies “try” scores of prisoners in a day, the work not appearing to interfere with their ordinary occupations.
Many of the prisoners plead[Pg 201] guilty; but it is well known that there is a widespread belief among the labouring classes that if you plead guilty you get a shorter sentence.
What justification there is for this belief I cannot say, but of its existence and its operative effect there is no room for doubt.
They do not seem to take into account the effect the registration of a conviction may have against them at any future time, and pleas are given that no lawyer would advise.
I do not mean to suggest that people in large numbers plead guilty when they have no knowledge of the offence, but that the act they have committed may have been capable of another than a criminal construction.
X 30, a girl, is charged with fraud, which is a sufficiently serious crime.
She is remanded to prison, and there states she has been advised to plead guilty and she will get off lightly.
She is told of the grave nature of the offence and legal assistance is obtained for her.
It is found that she is a wayward girl who left her people and came to Glasgow.
She obtained employment in a shop, and got lodgings in a part of Glasgow that is not very reputable and with people who were not likely to keep her straight.
She lost her work and was kept on in her lodgings; but an event occurred there which made it imperative that she should go elsewhere, and she removed to the house of her landlady’s daughter.
She was there a fortnight when she met a woman whom she knew and through her obtained a situation.
She left her lodgings and went to live with this woman.
At the instance of her former landlady she was arrested for obtaining board and lodgings on false pretences.
It was shown that she had paid her debt while she was working; and she protested she had made no false pretences, but meant to pay the[Pg 202] balance when she could.
If she had not had legal advice and assistance there is no doubt that this girl would have had a conviction for fraud recorded against her.
She had got into bad company and was on the way to the gutter, but by the operation of the law she would have been driven there.
To deal properly with the large numbers which come before the Police Courts would take a great deal of time, but that is no reason why the cases should be hurried through.
If a man has the means to fee a lawyer he is in a better case, or if he has committed an offence which is serious enough to cause his remand to a higher Court, for there he will get legal assistance free; but if he is simply a petty offender with no one to help him he will probably get dealt with without any loss of time and be sentenced by scale.
It is time that some provision was made to have the police court made less a police court and more a court of justice.
There is far too much police about it for the public interest.
Anybody may attend, but few do so; and the proceedings might for all practical purposes be conducted in private, so far as the towns are concerned.
The cases are seldom reported, and when the newspapers do notice the proceedings it is usually in a jocular way; but they are no joke to the persons concerned.
A sensational murder is detailed and canvassed as though the only matter of importance to the country was the hanging of the wretch who has got into the limelight.
Every hysterical theorist is anxious to get his opinion of the proper way to treat criminals put before the public; and all the time we are busily engaged in putting into our machine young and old who have taken the first step downwards, and congratulating ourselves on the smoothness with[Pg 203] which it works.
It is not cruelty that causes us to behave in this way, but sheer stupidity and lack of imagination.
Now and then a man who has eyes to see gets made a Bailie, but he makes a poor police judge.
Those who look upon themselves and are credited by others with the heaven-born instinct are as likely to be the men whom no one would trust to be a judge in his own cause; and it is quite possible for a man who is narrow-minded, vindictive, and callous to have the fate of his poorer fellow-citizens placed in his hands, and, because he likes the work, to continue on the bench long after his term as a Bailie has expired.
If it is important to deal with wrongdoing in the beginning; if it is desirable to prevent people from being sent to prison when that can be avoided; it is obvious that we must see that our minor courts are so arranged and so officered that those who come before them have at least as good a chance of having their cases weighed as the old hands who go to the higher Courts get there.
The Sheriff may sit to try cases summarily, just as the Bailie does; but the court is ordered differently.
The Procurator-Fiscal has no connection with the police.
The case is reported by them to him and he makes his own enquiries and may drop proceedings altogether.
The Sheriff is an experienced lawyer and he sees that the prisoner’s case is properly presented.
The prisoner, if he wishes, may have a law-agent to appear on his behalf, and in jury cases it is the duty of the prison authorities to see that a lawyer has the defence in hand.
In Scotland it has been the custom for all indicted prisoners who have not the means to pay for legal advice to receive competent legal representation.
The Agents for the Poor give their services freely and[Pg 204] ungrudgingly.
They behave towards the poor person who is accused of crime in the same way as the hospital doctors do to the sick who present themselves.
In the course of their work they have to devote considerable time to the cases of those whose defence is entrusted to them; and if the charge is one that brings the accused before the High Court they appear by counsel for him.
No person appears in the dock of the High Courts in Scotland who has not a qualified member of the Bar to defend him; and the absence of financial means does not affect this privilege.
This provision of legal advice and assistance is not made at the expense of the public, but at that of the profession; and it is of as much benefit in its own way as that made for the sick by the members of the medical profession.
I have never seen young medical men work with more enthusiasm to pull a patient from the jaws of death than is shown by the lawyers in their efforts to snatch the accused poor person from the hands of the prosecution.
In both cases the energy might be expended to better purpose; for sick persons are frequently restored to health only to become a greater nuisance to their neighbours, and some accused persons are acquitted and sent out to prey on society; but when all discount has been made there is left a great deal of good work that was well worth doing.
With regard to the work of both doctor and lawyer, we may some day take steps to see that the persons restored to health do not use their powers to the disadvantage of society, and that those restored to liberty do not use their freedom to molest others.
At present we take no account of them once they have ceased to be cases—to our disadvantage as well as to theirs—and no one recognises more clearly than the lawyer that he is sometimes engaged in the attempt to turn loose on society a man[Pg 205] who has no intention of conforming to its laws.
On the other hand, everyone who has taken part in the work knows that were it not for his action serious injustice would be likely to take place.
If there were as full a provision made for the defence of prisoners who come before the Police Courts as exists for that of those who appear in the higher Courts, it would be alike to the advantage of the officials, the prisoners, and the public; but to ask that such a provision should be made at the sole cost of the legal profession is to ask too much.
In special cases they have never been appealed to in vain; and they need to give more time to one case than would enable a medical man to attend twenty.
Their services are not sufficiently appreciated and known by the general public, or it would be recognised that they have contributed to save many poor people from degradation and helped to prevent accessions to the ranks of the habitual offender.
No one would propose that prisoners who are called before the higher Courts should be deprived of skilled advice and advocacy unless they are able to pay, and yet there is less need in these Courts than in the Police Courts for the provision that exists.
When a prisoner has been remitted from a Police Court he is transferred in a van to prison, to await further proceedings.
It has often been remarked that the various departments in Corporations seem to act independently of each other.
The Sanitary Department acts energetically to prevent overcrowding in some circumstances, but the van used for conveying prisoners to prison seems to have escaped their notice.
It is a prehistoric vehicle in the form of a bus without windows.
It is divided into compartments each holding a number of prisoners, and the partitions[Pg 206] contribute to prevent proper ventilation.
Any vehicle of the kind would never be licensed for the conveyance of ordinary passengers, animal or human, by a modern sanitary authority.
The presiding judge in the Higher Courts is either a Sheriff or a Lord of Justiciary.
The Sheriff has jurisdiction over a County and may sit both as judge and jury; that is to say, he may try cases summarily; but his Court differs materially, even when he is doing so, from that of the Burgh Magistrate.
In the first place, more public attention is given to the proceedings, for the higher the Court the greater is the interest shown in its work.
In small country burghs this rule may not hold good, for there the inhabitants know more of what is doing in their midst.
They may be acquainted with police, judge, and offender, personally; and in that case are likely to take a lively interest in the proceedings, criticising freely all the parties and influencing powerfully the tone of the Court; but in a great city the Police Courts might as well be held anywhere for all the effective public supervision and informed criticism they receive.
Then the police are not prosecutors in the Sheriff Summary Courts.
The prosecution is conducted by a Procurator-Fiscal who is appointed by the Lord Advocate, and who holds his appointment for life and is not in any way under the authority of the police.
The Sheriff is a man of experience in his profession, and is continually engaged in judicial work, mostly of a civil character.
He is not merely or mainly engaged in dealing with criminals, and is not likely to acquire a subconscious prejudice against the defendant.
The Lord Advocate is the head of the department concerned with prosecutions in Scotland, and no[Pg 207] criminal action can be taken without his direction or concurrence.
Private prosecutions at common law are practically unknown.
His deputes act for him in the higher Courts and are instructed by the procurators-fiscal, who are solicitors and prosecute in the Sheriff Courts themselves.
It is their duty to make enquiries into all charges with which the Police Courts are not competent to deal, and these enquiries are conducted privately.
From the time a prisoner is passed on to them until he appears at the Court to plead or to be tried there are no public proceedings against him.
He is brought into the Court at an early stage, the charge is read over to him, and he is asked to make a declaration.
A law-agent is provided for his assistance, and he is told that anything he says by way of declaration may be used against him.
The agent may advise him to say nothing and he usually does so, his declaration amounting simply to a denial of the charge.
This is signed by him and read at his trial, usually closing the case for the Crown.
While the declaration is being taken the public are excluded from the Court.
If the Procurator-Fiscal considers that his enquiry does not justify further proceedings the charge is dropped, provided the Lord Advocate agrees; but if the authorities are satisfied there is a case for trial an indictment is served.
In Scotland when a prisoner is indicted to appear before a jury court he must be served seventeen days before his trial with a copy of the indictment, containing the charge, a list of the productions against him, and a list of the witnesses to be called for the prosecution.
Seven days thereafter he is brought before the Court to plead to the charge.
If he plead guilty he may be dealt with there and then.
If he plead not guilty his plea is recorded and he is sent[Pg 208] back till the second diet of the court.
If he intend to set up a special defence, such as insanity or an alibi, notice of such defence has to be given at the pleading diet; but the witnesses he intends to call need not be notified to the Crown until three days before the trial by jury.
The prosecution cannot add any productions or any witnesses to the list furnished in the indictment; but if it is decided that additional witnesses are required the diet may be deserted and a new indictment served.
In no case, however, can a prisoner be kept with a charge hanging over his head for more than one hundred and seventeen days from the date of his committal.
After that time he is entitled to be liberated and no further proceedings on the charge can be taken against him at any time.
The Crown usually makes careful enquiries in the public interest when any special plea of insanity is brought forward; and if satisfied that the plea is a valid one, has provided, at the public expense, expert testimony to that effect on behalf of the prisoner.
The greatest care has been taken to ensure that prisoners brought before the higher Courts do not suffer from lack of means, and there is never any disposition on the part of the prosecutor to make it a point of honour that he should obtain a conviction.
There is no speech by the prosecutor in opening his case.
So far as the Court is concerned the jury start without any bias against the prisoner, and as the evidence is led they gain their knowledge of the case.
In most cases the prosecutor does not address the jury at all.
The character of the prisoner is not disclosed to the jury until after their verdict has been returned.
If during the trial any reference is initiated by the prosecution as to previous convictions, the prisoner is entitled to[Pg 209] an acquittal upon the charge against him.
The point the jury has to determine is whether the person committed the crime charged, and they have to find their verdict simply on the evidence led.
The Scottish jury consists of fifteen men, and the verdict of a majority is required.
They may decline on the evidence to express an opinion on the prisoner’s guilt, but instead may find the charge not proven.
This is the most practical provision for giving a prisoner the benefit of any doubt that exists in their minds after hearing the evidence.
Whatever the verdict may be, the prisoner, having been once tried, cannot again be charged with the same offence.
It is difficult to conceive any system under which a prisoner charged with crime could be more fairly treated; and if in the minor Courts offenders received the same consideration, the number sent to prison would be greatly diminished and the ranks of the habitual offender would fail to receive so many recruits.
Centralisation—The constitution of the Prison Commission—Parliamentary control—The Commissioners—The rules—The visiting committee—The governor and the matron—The chaplain—The medical officer—The staff.
BEFORE the year 1877 all the Scottish prisons, with the exception of the Penitentiary at Perth, were under the control and management of the local authorities.
One result was that there were many standards of treatment, and Parliament decided that as the prevailing methods were unsatisfactory the treatment of prisoners and the management of prisons should be vested in a central Board.
The changes made by the Prison Commission have been many, and the prison of to-day is widely different from that of forty years ago; but before attributing all improvements to the new system it is fair to take into account the progress made in local administration during that time.
The true comparison is not between the prison of forty years ago and that of to-day, but between the prison and the local institutions of to-day.
Central management is likely to result in uniformity of routine and treatment in all prisons; but it is questionable whether that is a gain.
It may tend to more economical administration if the test is one of expenditure of money, but it makes experiment in the way of reform very difficult.
Not only are no two men alike, but no[Pg 211] two districts are alike; and methods of dealing with people belonging to one part of Scotland are not necessarily the best to apply to the inhabitants of another part.
It is not a good thing to bring prisoners from outlying districts to centres; there is always a danger of their remaining there after their liberation and obtaining introductions that will not be likely to help them except in the way of wrongdoing.
The large institution may cost less money, but it can never have such intimate supervision as the small one.
The Prison Commission for Scotland consists of two ex-officio and two paid members.
The ex-officio members are the Crown Agent and the Sheriff of Perthshire.
The Crown Agent goes out with the Government of the day, but he is not usually a Member of Parliament.
The Sheriff of Perthshire in virtue of his office had a place on the board which managed the old Penitentiary at Perth; that is probably the reason why he is a Commissioner of Prisons under the Act of 1877.
It is certainly not because Perthshire is a county which contributes many criminals from its Courts to the prison population.
There are thus two lawyers on the Board, one being a judge and the other being the solicitor in whose office public prosecutions are directed.
The other Commissioners are permanent civil servants, appointed by the Secretary for Scotland.
At first there were also two Inspectors who gave their whole time to the work of visiting the various prisons and reporting on their condition and management to the Secretary of State, but in process of time there has been a change, and now the Secretary of the Commission is the only Inspector.
The Commissioners themselves visit the prisons and inspect them; but as they are responsible for the[Pg 212] management, the arrangement is open to the criticism that they report on their own work, without independent inspection.
The Secretary of State is the head of the Board, and is responsible to Parliament for the work of the department; but his sole means of knowing that work is the reports he receives from the Commission.
Whether on all boards Members of Parliament should not have a place and power, just as members of a town council form the supervising authority over the work of its departments, is a question that will bear discussion.
At present the Member of Parliament can only make himself a nuisance by asking questions; that is what it amounts to, since no matter what the answer may be, it leaves him very much where he was.
He is usually as ignorant at the end as he was when he began.
Some aggrieved constituent having more faith than knowledge has made an ex-parte statement to his representative, who puts a question to the Minister, who passes it on to the department concerned, which transmits to him the answer given by the person complained of, which shows that there is no ground for the complaint.
It may be uncomfortable for someone, but it is not business.
If the complaints are too frequent or the complainers too influential to be disregarded, the Minister forms a committee of enquiry which turns things up for a time, censures somebody who is too small to cause trouble, makes a few apologetic suggestions for alterations, white-washes with liberality those who most need it, and presents another report for the waste-paper basket.
Spasmodic enquiries can never make up for systematic neglect, and their effect is seldom to cause as much improvement as irritation.
The danger to the public service is not from corruption, but from the[Pg 213] official mind getting out of touch with the spirit of the time and the needs of the public.
Rules for the government of prisons are laid down by the Secretary for Scotland, and these rules become statutory after they have been laid on the table of the House of Commons for a period.
They define the duties of the various officials, lay down regulations for the treatment of the prisoners, and deal in detail with the management of the prisons.
The Commissioners have the whole control in their hands, subject to the rules.
They appoint all the inferior officers; transfer and promote them; or dismiss them if their conduct is unsatisfactory.
They do not appoint the superior officers, but it is to be expected that their advice will be considered by the Secretary of State, with whom the nominations lie.
As a Commissioner cannot be in more than one place at a time, they cannot be expected to have any intimate knowledge of the capability of the men who depend for promotion on them; and their task in this matter alone is no easy one.
As for knowledge of the prisoners at first hand, that is impossible; for prisoners are as hard to know as other people, and one person cannot know much of another as the result of an occasional short conversation.
If they were liable to err they could not be criticised effectively; for any official who might be in a position to criticise would run the risk of not being in that position long; any prisoner might be looked upon as a prejudiced person; and no member of the public is able to offer criticism, for he does not know the facts.
This is an unfortunate state of affairs; for even the ablest minds are the better for being brought in conflict with others and in contact with other ideas, and a system that discourages independent thought is not likely to lead to rapid[Pg 214] progress.
It has its advantages, however, for a knowledge of the rules and a habit of always carrying them out ensure to the prisoner, peace, and to the officer a good reputation and better prospects than he could ever hope for if he were foolish enough to set his brains to work.
In a private business, when a man gets a position, he cannot hold it unless by exercising his judgment in such a way as to satisfy his employer that he is worth his salt; when he fails in this he is liable to dismissal.
There is no question of bankruptcy for one thing, and there is security of tenure for another.
You cannot depend on always having men of ability in the posts, but by the aid of rules you can teach a person of moderate talent to get through his work.
To disregard the rules may be justifiable in a given case and so far as that case is concerned, but it is liable to knock the whole machine out of gear.
There are many able men in all branches of the civil service, and the fact is often referred to by Cabinet Ministers amid loud cheers from the public; but they recognise the need for routine and follow it.
They would otherwise have less time for literary work, in which they can use their original powers to greater advantage.
The public departments have produced more poets, novelists, critics, and playwrights than any other large businesses, as, for instance, the railways or the engineering trades.
These also employ talented men, but their talents are deflected to business channels.
If they had their work laid down for them in rules and regulations they also might add to the gaiety of nations.
Commissioners are always appointed from among men in a good position whose minds have not been[Pg 215] warped by any previous association with prisons.
They can thus approach their duties without prejudice; and officials and prisoners alike have the satisfaction of knowing that they are in the hands of gentlemen.
Each prison has its visiting committee, consisting of members nominated by various local authorities with the addition of ladies nominated by the Secretary of State.
Under the rules for prisons it has considerable powers of criticism, but they are not much used.
In Glasgow the committee meets once a year, when its members arrange to visit the prison in pairs once monthly.
In practice this means that each member spends in the prison two or three hours on an average every year.
How much the members can learn about the work of the prison in that time may be surmised.
They go round the place and ask each prisoner if he has any complaints, and they seldom receive any.
They see that the place and its inmates are kept clean; that the food is good; that the sick are being attended to; and they may hear a complaint of breach of discipline and award a punishment therefor occasionally.
They record their visits and make any suggestion that may occur to them.
They may communicate direct with the Secretary of State if they choose.
They might perform a very useful part in the management of the prison if their powers were used to the full extent and their meetings were more frequent.
They have no power to incur expenditure, but without doing so it is quite conceivable that by inviting the officials to explain matters and to direct their attention to special cases they might do a great deal to suggest improvements, with a view to prevent certain people from being sent to prison and to provide for others on their release.
They have the power to allow or to refuse certain[Pg 216] privileges to untried prisoners.
They are all agreed that the prison is an admirably managed institution, as free from faults as any place could be; but whether they have ever got the length of asking themselves what is the use of it is doubtful.
It is clean—as it well may be; it is orderly—which causes no surprise, although its inmates are there because they “cannot behave themselves”; there are no complaints, and at the end of a visit they know as much of the inmates as they might learn of natural history by a walk round the Zoo.
They might conceivably be set to find out on behalf of the local authorities they represent why the prisoners are there and why so many of them return; whether it is not time we were seeking other means of dealing with them, and what means; whether nothing more and nothing else can be done than is done at present to help them on their liberation.
The Commissioners have enough to do; and in the nature of things they are not so well qualified to deal with these subjects as the local authorities, for they cannot come so intimately in touch with local conditions.
But the members of the visiting committees are usually busy men on the local Councils and have little time to spend on prison affairs, which may be a very good reason for the Councils nominating others who could find the time.
So long as they merely see that the prisoner is not being ill-used outwith the rules, they are only looking after the interest of prisoners and public in a partial way.
When they begin to examine matters from the standpoint of the public welfare—when they realise that the treatment of the criminal is as much a matter of public health as the treatment of the sick, and that it is to the interest of the community that it should be undertaken in such[Pg 217] a way as to lead to his reformation—it will be better for everybody, including the prisoner.
I can imagine local committees making discoveries for themselves with regard to the causation of crime that would influence powerfully their whole administration; bringing pressure to bear within the law where it is most required and relieving pressure where it is harmful; using the powers they have, instead of lamenting the want of power which there is no evidence they could use if it were given them; but it needs a beginning.
Each prison is in charge of a Governor who is in daily communication with the office in Edinburgh.
He visits the prisoners once daily and hears any complaints by them or regarding them.
He has the power to impose certain punishments for offences against discipline, but if they involve a decrease of diet they must be confirmed by the Medical Officer, who may refuse to allow them on medical grounds.
He is responsible for the carrying out of the rules and his discretionary power is very small.
No qualification has been laid down for the position, and this leaves the Secretary of State free to appoint anybody whom he considers most likely to perform the duties satisfactorily, and prevents the post becoming a preserve for the members of any profession.
In Scotland military men have been appointed, and members of the clerical staff and warders have been promoted to governorships, but no professional man has ever been placed in such an important position.
When the Governor is absent or on leave his place is taken by the head warder, who performs the duties of this important office in addition to his own.
Where there are a sufficient number of female prisoners there is a Matron in charge of them, who[Pg 218] visits them in the same way as the Governor does the males and discharges similar duties towards them.
The Prison Chaplain must be an ordained minister, and in the larger prisons he holds services weekly and conducts prayers daily.
He visits the prisoners in their cells and administers spiritual consolation and advice; and he does what he can to help them on their liberation.
Prisoners who are Roman Catholics and those who are Episcopalians are visited by clergymen of those Churches in a similar way.
The Medical Officer must be a registered practitioner, and it is his duty to look after the health of the staff and of the prisoners.
Of all the officials he has the freest hand, for it has not so far been practicable to direct the treatment of the sick from a central office; but his very freedom—such as it is—may lead him into trouble should he pay regard to differences of temperament among prisoners and go beyond a consideration of merely physical signs.
If he confine his energies to carrying out the rules he need never fear death from work or worry.
He may hope to become a highly respectable fossil and have a place in the esteem of everyone to whom he has caused no trouble.
He can do much to help prisoners, not by indulging them, but by humanising the place to some extent and setting the tone.
He need not be a better man than his colleagues, but he is less a part of the working machine, and that should make a difference in his attitude.
He is not concerned with discipline, for the sick are free of it, so that in a sense it is his business to interfere with discipline.
His work is to do the prisoners good in a way they can understand; and he has even an advantage over the Chaplain, whom they also recognise as a humanising influence, for men are usually a good deal more anxious about their[Pg 219] bodies than about their souls.
The Governor may be a better man than either the Doctor or the Chaplain, but his position as the head of a system that the prisoners do not regard as directed to their aid handicaps his influence on them.
At one time the clerical staff of the prisons was composed of clerks, but now men who join as warders are promoted to clerkships, serving part of the day in the prison and part in the office.
All applicants for warderships have to pass a series of examinations and to serve on probation for twelve months before being finally admitted to the service.